Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 5-1 
Section 5. Districts 
 
5.1 Establishment of Districts 
For the purpose of this Bylaw and to provide for the most efficient use of land, the Town is 
divided into the following districts as shown on the Zoning Map approved by the Town Meeting 
on May 15, 2003, including all subsequent amendments, which is hereby incorporated into and 
made a part of this Bylaw: 
 
A. Use Districts: 
1. Residential Districts 
a. Village Residence (VR) 
b. Neighborhood Residence (NR) 
c. Rural Residence (RR) 
d. Multi-Family Residence (MF) 
2. Business Districts 
a. Neighborhood Business (NB) 
b. General Business (GB) 
c. Commercial (C) 
3. Industrial Districts 
a. Industrial (I) 
B. Special Districts: 
1. Adult Entertainment 
C. Overlay Districts: 
1. Flood Plain 
2. Historic 
3. Residential Cluster 
4. Townhouse 
5. Elderly Housing 
6. Self-Service Storage Facility 
7. Mill Conversion and Reuse District 
8. Medical Marijuana Overlay District  
9. Adult Use Marijuana Overlay District  
10. Mixed Use Overlay District  
 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 5-2 
5.2 Zoning District Boundaries 
A. Where the zoning boundary lines are shown upon the Zoning Map as the street lines of 
public or private streets or ways, the center lines of those streets or ways shall be the 
boundary lines. 
B. Where zoning boundary lines are shown approximately on the location of existing 
property or lot lines and the exact location of the zoning boundaries is not indicated by 
means of figures, distance or otherwise, the property or lot lines shall be the zoning 
boundary lines. 
C. Where the zoning boundary lines are shown upon the Zoning Map outside of and 
approximately parallel to street lines, they shall be considered to be parallel to the street 
lines. Figures placed upon the Zoning Map between the zoning boundary lines and the 
street lines indicate measurements at right angles to the street unless otherwise specified. 
D. In cases not covered by the provisions of paragraphs A, B, and C above, the location of 
zoning boundary lines shall be determined by the distances in feet when given upon the 
Zoning Map, based on the scale of the Zoning Map. 
E. Town officials, Town boards, and the public shall determine the boundaries of the Flood 
Plain District based solely on the locations described below on the listed reference maps, 
in the custody of the Town Engineer and Board of Health: 
1. Green Maps. Any land showing flood plain limits on the 1973 Town of Billerica, 
Massachusetts, Flood Plain Index Maps and the 147 contour maps at 100 scale 
prepared by Green Engineering Affiliates, Inc. [hereinafter "Green Maps"]; 
2. Concord River Adjustment. Any land shown on the Green Maps along the Concord 
River, after an adjustment of three feet below the flood contour as delineated, shall be 
considered within the 100-year flood level. 
3. Shawsheen River Adjustment. Any land shown on the Green Maps along the 
Shawsheen River, after an adjustment of one foot below the flood contour as 
delineated, shall be considered within the 100-year flood level. 
4. Federal Maps: Any land shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), 
community panel number 250183, with an effective date of July 8, 2025, prepared by 
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Federal Insurance 
Administration. issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for 
the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The exact boundaries of 
the District shall be defined by the 1%-chance base flood elevations shown on the 
FIRM and further defined by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) 
report dated July 8, 2025. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by 
reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building Official, 
Conservation Commission, and Board of Health . Nothing in this section shall 
prohibit the Conservation Commission, the Board of Health, or both, from making 
non-zoning determinations of the flood plain in order to perform its required duties. 
F. When a lot in one ownership is situated partly in the Town and partly in an adjacent town 
or city, the provisions, regulations, and restrictions of this Bylaw shall be applied to that 
portion of the lot that lies in the Town in the same manner as if the entire lot were 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 5-3 
situated therein. 
G. When a lot in one ownership is situated partly in one Zoning District and partly in 
another Zoning District, the provisions, regulations, and restrictions for the most 
restrictive Zoning District shall apply to the entire lot unless all construction and use of 
the lot takes place within the least restrictive Zoning District, in which case the least 
restrictive provisions, regulations, and restrictions shall apply. 
H. Whenever the exact location of a zoning boundary line cannot be precisely determined 
under the provisions stated above, the identification and location of the boundary line 
shall be determined by the Planning Board and submitted for Town Meeting approval, 
subject to any amendments Town Meeting may desire. Until Town Meeting votes, the 
provisions of the most restrictive Zoning District located on the lot in question shall 
apply. The zoning districts listed under each of the three categories within the list of 
Districts under Section 5 of this Zoning Bylaw shall start with (1) as the most restrictive 
zoning district and ascend in numbered order to the least restrictive. 
  
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-1 
Section 6. Use Regulations 
 
6.1 Purposes 
Section 6 regulates the use of land, buildings, and structures in each district. 
 
6.2 General 
A. No land shall be used and no structure shall be erected or used except as set forth in the 
Table of Use Regulations under Section 6.3, including the notes to the Table, or as 
otherwise set forth in this Bylaw, or as exempted by the General Laws, or by variance 
from the Zoning Board of Appeals, as provided in G.L. c. 40A, § 10 and Section 4.4 of 
this Bylaw. Any building or use of premises not specifically permitted is prohibited. 
B. The following uses are expressly prohibited:  
1. Fertilizer plants;  
2. Junk yards;  
3. Open-air storage of junk, salvage, unregistered vehicles, and wastes;  
4. Race tracks;  
5. Rendering plants;  
6. Salvage yards;  
7. Slaughterhouses;  
8. Manufactured housing;  
9. Hazardous waste facility; or 
10. Trailer or trailer camps. 
C. In all districts, surface runoff rates existing at predevelopment shall not be increased at 
post-development.  
D. In all districts, except Residential Districts, screening shall be provided, erected, and 
maintained to shield business and industrial uses of land and buildings from adjoining 
residential and municipal lots and shall consist of a solid fence, wall, landscaped earthen 
barrier, evergreen planting or combination of these elements not less than six feet in 
height running along the property line. Screening may be reduced to three and one-half 
feet where it acts to shield an adjacent public way. 
E. Any non-residential building with an aggregate sum of 5,000 square feet gross floor area 
or greater per site shall require site plan approval special permit by the Planning Board. 
This includes any additions to an existing, non-residential building that increases the 
aggregate sum of the gross floor area to more than 5,000 square feet per lot. 
F. Any mixed use shall be subject to the most restrictive provisions of all the uses included 
within the mixed use as determined by the Inspector of Buildings. 
 
 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-2 
6.3 Table of Use Regulations 
A. See Appendix A, Table 1. 
B. Symbols in the Table of Use Regulations shall mean the following: 
Y — A permitted use  
N — A prohibited use 
SZ — A use requiring a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals  
SP — A use requiring a special permit from the Planning Board 
SA — A use requiring a special permit and site plan approval from the Planning 
Board 
 
6.4 Special Regulations for Multifamily Dwellings 
A. Dimensional Requirements.  
1. Area and frontage 
a. The minimum site size shall be 1.5 acres. 
b. The minimum frontage shall be 150 feet. 
c. Density 
(i) Buildings shall not cover more than 30 percent of the site. 
(ii) At least 40 percent of the site shall be maintained as green space. 
(iii)There shall be a minimum distance of 40 feet between residential buildings. 
(iv) No open parking or driveway shall be closer than 15 feet to a wall containing 
habitable space. 
(v) A minimum of 6,800 square feet of land shall be required for each dwelling 
unit. 
(vi) The required minimum area used in the calculation shall not include any 
bordering vegetative wetlands as defined by G.L. c. 131, § 40 and by 310 
CMR 10.00 nor any flood plain as described in this Bylaw. 
2. Density Incentive. In addition to the density allowed under this subsection, the 
maximum density may be increased by 20 percent if at least half of all additional 
units created are affordable housing as defined by Section 2. For example, if a site 
can be developed with 10 dwelling units by right or special permit, the density could 
be increased to a maximum of 12 units if one of the additional two units is affordable 
housing. In cases where 10 percent affordable housing is required, a project that is 
increased from 10 to 12 units would include two units of affordable housing and 10 
market-rate units. 
3. Yards. 
a. On each site, the minimum front setback shall be 35 feet, and the minimum side and 
rear setbacks shall be 30 feet. 
b. Where a multi-family dwelling abuts a single-family district, the side and rear 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-3 
setbacks shall be a minimum of 50 feet, which shall be retained in its natural wooded 
state or landscaped along the perimeter abutting the single-family district. In all 
cases, a landscaped buffer strip shall be provided to protect adjoining properties 
from the effects of noise, light, air, or visual impact. 
4. Green Strips 
a. A 25-foot-wide green strip shall be provided around the perimeter of the tract, except 
where curb cuts are located. 
b. Green strips shall consist of planted or natural vegetation, including trees, shrubs, 
grasses, ground cover, and flowers. 
c. The green strip shall not be built on, paved, or parked on. 
5. Height. Multi-family dwellings shall not exceed two and one-half stories nor be more 
than 35 feet in height, provided that no habitable space shall be located below the 
mean finished grade of the ground adjoining the building or above the second story. 
6. Parking. There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
7. Infrastructure 
a. All sites must be served by sewer and water as approved by the appropriate Town 
board, department, commission, or agent. 
b. All sites shall have fire lanes as designated by the Billerica Fire Department for the 
purposes of fire protection. 
c. The requirement for a fire lane surrounding the structure shall not be construed to 
mean that paved access surrounding the structure is required. The area may be 
planted with low plantings of a size that would not impede fire vehicles. 
8. Access Drive. All access roads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with 
the criteria specified by the Billerica Department of Public Works. 
9. Affordable Housing Component 
a. Fifteen percent of the units created under these provisions shall be affordable 
housing as defined in Section 2 of this Bylaw. The Billerica Housing Authority is 
exempt from this requirement because the units under its control are categorically 
affordable. 
b. As an alternative to the above requirement, and as allowed by law, an applicant may 
contribute a fee per unit to the Town of Billerica to be used for the development of 
affordable housing in lieu of or in conjunction with constructing and offering 
affordable units within the locus of the proposed development. The fee per unit shall 
be based upon the calculation of the fair market price of the unit minus the 
construction cost of the unit or the construction cost, whichever is greater. 
c. The fee may be paid in one-third installments over the projected development's 
build-out, with the final payment to be made before the last unit is sold. The Select 
Board shall accept the fee to be used for Affordable Housing and expended in 
accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 44, § 53a. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-4 
10. Dwelling Units. Multi-family dwellings may be maintained as rental units or sold as 
condominiums. This shall not restrict the allocation of outdoor space adjacent to 
individual dwelling units for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
11. Accessory Buildings and Structures 
a. Swimming pools, garages, and all accessory uses, buildings, and structures that are 
part of a multi-family development shall comply with the green strip and setback 
requirements of this Bylaw. 
b. A community building for meetings and social activities of the residents shall be 
permitted but shall not exceed 2,000 square feet of gross floor area and shall comply 
with all green strip and setback requirements of this Bylaw. 
c. All accessory uses, buildings, and structures shall provide adequate parking. 
12. Required Findings: 
a. The use complies with the site plan approval requirements of this Bylaw; 
b. The requested use is desirable to the public convenience or welfare; 
c. The requested use will not create or add to undue traffic congestion, or unduly 
impair pedestrian safety; 
d. The requested use provides for the convenience and safety of vehicular and 
pedestrian movement within the site and in relation to adjacent streets, property, and 
improvements; 
e. The requested use will not create or add to undue traffic congestion, or unduly 
impair pedestrian safety; 
f. The requested use will not overload any public water, drainage, sewer, or municipal 
system or any other municipal system to such an extent that the requested use or any 
developed use in the immediate area or in any other area of the Town will be unduly 
subjected to hazards affecting health, safety, or the general welfare. 
g. The requested use will not impair the integrity or character of the district or 
adjoining districts, nor be detrimental to the public health, convenience, or welfare 
h. The requested use will not, by its addition to a neighborhood, cause an excess of that 
particular use that could be detrimental to the character of said neighborhood 
i. The design and architectural treatment of the use are not incongruous with or 
inappropriate for the character of the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be 
constructed. 
j. There is an adequate landscape buffer strip provided to protect adjoining properties 
from the effects of noise, lights, air, or visual impact. 
k. No building or access facilities shall be placed on any portion of the land determined 
by the Board of Health to be unsuitable for such construction. 
 
6.5 Special Regulations For Solar Energy Conversion Systems (SECS) 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-5 
A. Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to provide standards for the placement, 
design, installation, monitoring, maintenance and operation of solar energy conversion 
systems to: 
1. Address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources. and  
2. Allow individual homeowners and/or businesses to reduce energy costs and increase 
the availability of clean, renewable energy. 
B. General Provisions: 
1. Where allowed, all freestanding SECS shall require special permit approval from the 
Planning Board prior to installation. Non-freestanding SECS, allowed by right, shall 
require a building permit from the Inspector of Buildings. 
2. Nothing in this section is intended to supersede any non-zoning requirement in any 
other local, state or federal regulation. If not specifically exempted, all zoning 
regulations of the zoning district in which the SECS are proposed are applicable. 
3. Maintenance: SECS shall be operated and maintained in good condition. Should any 
part of the system suffer damage or deterioration to become a threat to public health 
or safety, as determined by the Inspector of Buildings, the system shall be 
immediately removed or repaired by the property owner. Operation of the SECS shall 
not be allowed to resume until the Inspector of Buildings has determined that the 
SECS has been repaired and complies with all applicable regulations. 
4. Setbacks: Unless otherwise indicated, freestanding SECS shall conform to the current 
setback and height requirements for the zoning district in which it is to be located. 
5. On public property, no new plantings shall be allowed, and existing plantings shall be 
trimmed, to allow continuous solar access to SECS. 
6.  Connections to the power grid: 
a. For freestanding SECS, all utility connections, except transformers, shall be placed 
underground. 
b. All applicants for SECS must notify the local electrical utility provider of the permit 
and submit documentation to that effect to the permitting authority, as outlined in 
Section B10 below, as part of the application. 
c. A SECS shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access to the power grid. 
7. SECS are not allowed in Historic Districts without written approval from the 
appropriate Historic Districts Commission. 
8. No advertising unrelated to the production of electrical energy, of any type shall be 
allowed on any SECS except for the following: 
a. Educational signs providing information about the facility and the benefits of 
renewable energy; 
b. Reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the SECS, not to 
include advertising displays; 
c. There shall be a sign placed on all freestanding SECS that identify the 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-6 
owner/operator, provide a 24-hour emergency contact number and warn of any 
danger. 
9. No additional off-street parking shall be required for any freestanding SECS, unless 
deemed necessary in the opinion of the Planning Board. 
10. Height: 
a. A non-freestanding SECS shall not exceed 15 feet in height as measured from the 
base of the energy conversion system(s), at the point of attachment(s) to the highest 
possible point of the SECS. 
b. The total height of the non-freestanding SECS, and the structure to which it is 
attached, shall not exceed the building height allowed in the zoning district in which 
the structure is located. 
c. The total height of a freestanding SECS shall not exceed that which is permitted in 
the subject zoning district. 
11. The Special Permit Granting Authority for freestanding SECS shall be the Planning 
Board. The Planning Board may impose reasonable stipulations, conditions, 
safeguards and limitations, and may require the applicant to implement reasonable 
measures to mitigate unforeseen adverse impacts of the SECS. In addition to other 
special permit criteria, to grant a special permit under this section, the Planning Board 
must find that: 
a. The specific site is an appropriate location for the use; 
b. The use is not expected to adversely affect the neighborhood and surrounding 
properties; 
c. The use is not expected to create a nuisance; and 
d. Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the 
SECS. 
C. Permitting Procedures and Requirements: 
1. Residential zones: In addition to the General Provisions in Section B above, the 
following procedures and requirements shall apply in all residential zones: 
a. All non-freestanding SECS shall be allowed as an “as-of-right-siting”. 
b. All freestanding SECS shall be allowed only after special permit approval from the 
Planning Board. 
c. Only one freestanding SECS shall be allowed per property of one acre, or more. 
Freestanding SECS shall be considered accessory uses to the primary use of the 
property. 
d. A permit application for freestanding SECS shall be submitted to the Planning Board 
for special permit approval. Unless specifically exempted by Section 6.5 or Section 
4.3 of this Bylaw, the following requirements shall apply to an application for 
freestanding SECS: 
(i) Section 4.7 A, B, E (except subsection 1), G, I, J, and K; and 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-7 
(ii) The plan for special permit approval shall be prepared by a licensed 
professional engineer (PE) or registered land surveyor (RLS), as appropriate. 
If prepared by a RLS, the Planning Board may require certification by a 
licensed engineer as to the structural integrity of the SECS itself. 
e. Multiple, non-freestanding SECS may be permitted if attached to existing primary or 
accessory structures on the site. 
2. Non-residential zones: In addition to the General Provisions in Section B above, the 
following procedures and requirements shall apply in all non-residential zones: 
a. Freestanding SECS are subject to special permit approval from the Planning Board 
and may be subject to the conditions and requirements of previously granted special 
permit/site plan and special permit approvals for the subject property and/or uses. 
b. SECS may be the primary use or an accessory use on a property and more than one 
structure may be placed on a property and/or building. 
c. A permit application for freestanding SECS shall be submitted to the Planning Board 
for special permit approval. Unless specifically exempted by this Section 6.5, the 
following requirements shall apply to special permit applications for freestanding 
SECS: 
(i) Section 4.7 A, B, E (except subsection 1), G, I, J, and K; and 
(ii) The plan for special permit approval shall be prepared by a professional 
engineer (PE) and/or registered land surveyor (RLS), as appropriate. If 
prepared by a RLS, the Planning Board may require certification by a licensed 
engineer as to the structural integrity of the SECS itself. 
d. All non-freestanding SECS shall be allowed as an as-of-right use. 
3. In addition to sections C1 and C2 above, the following requirements shall apply to all 
SECS permit applications submitted for Planning Board or building permit approval: 
a. An operation and maintenance plan (OMP) for the structure(s); 
b. Documentation of the SECS manufacturer, outlining specifications of the system(s); 
c. Requirements of Section 4.7 that apply to this section must be addressed in the 
permit application. If certain requirements of Section 4.7 are not appropriate or 
applicable, this must be indicated in the permit application and the reason for the 
inapplicability explained; and 
d. If deemed appropriate, the Planning Board may require the filing of a surety 
instrument for a SECS sufficient to secure performance of the conditions and 
observance of the safeguards and limitations of the special permit approval. 
However, in no case shall the Planning Board place such conditions on the approval 
to make the installation of a SECS impractical or unusable. This requirement may 
not apply to the DPU or DTC per the provisions of G.L. c. 81R. 
6.6 Special Regulations for Wireless Communication Facilities 
A. Purpose.  
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-8 
1. Section 6.6 provides for a special permit process for the siting of Wireless 
Communication Facilities while minimizing adverse impacts from the provision of 
wireless communication services, especially to properties in or abutting residential 
zoned neighborhoods.  
2. These regulations seek to minimize the number and height of associated facilities, 
provide standards and criteria regulating siting, promote the sharing of facilities, and 
help to promote, preserve and protect the quality of life for the residents of Billerica 
while seeking to remain in compliance with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 
1996. 
B. Siting Criteria. 
1. The Special Permit Granting Authority for this Section 6.6 shall be the Planning 
Board. Every application submitted under this section of the Bylaw shall meet the 
criteria set forth herein and under Section 4.3 of this Bylaw. 
2. WCFs shall be allowed in all zoning districts by Special Permit only. Whenever 
possible, WCFs shall be located in non-residential zoned districts. A WCF that must 
exceed any height restrictions within its zoning district may still seek a special permit 
provided the proposed facility complies with the remaining required regulations 
within the applicable zoning district. 
3. Preferred siting of WCFs is provided in the following order:  
a. Existing WCF sites;  
b. Town property, exclusive of school locations; 
c.  Industrial Districts;  
d. Commercial Business Districts;  
e. General Business Districts;  
f. Neighborhood Business Districts; and Village, Neighborhood, and Rural Residential 
Districts.  
g. WCFs shall not be placed within 250 feet of all municipal buildings which house 
employees for their scheduled working hours. 
4. Any new freestanding tower shall be of monopole construction. Lattice style towers 
and similar facilities requiring three or more legs and/or guy wires for support are 
prohibited. 
5. Wireless Communication Facilities and Services are dependent upon multiple sitings 
to complete a network. Therefore, the application process requires the identification 
of all projected network sites so the Town can evaluate the application within the 
contents of the entire network.  
a. Each carrier shall provide a geographic coverage map and narrative showing existing 
WCFs in the town and those outside the town within one mile of its corporate limits, 
whether it has a legal or equitable interest, whether by ownership, leasehold or 
otherwise. The map shall contain the following:  
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-9 
(i) A legend and scale;  
(ii) Exact addresses of existing antenna locations and any identification numbers;  
(iii)Labeled town borders;  
(iv) Street names; and  
(v) Landmarks, both natural and man-made.  
b. The map shall show by color-coded overlay both current and proposed coverage, 
differentiating by both in-building and in-vehicle coverage. Said documentation shall 
demonstrate that these facility sites do not already provide, nor have the potential to 
provide by site adjustment, adequate coverage. The carrier shall present a description 
of the site’s capacity, the number and type of panels, antenna, and/or transmitter, 
receivers it can accommodate and estimates of the cumulative emissions that will be 
generated on the site including but not limited to RFR. 
6. The applicant shall provide written documentation that the proposed facility uses the 
least disruptive technology available, at the time of application, by which it can 
provide adequate coverage in conjunction with all facility sites proposed and existing. 
7. No WCF shall be considered exempt from this Section 6.6 by sharing a tower or other 
structure. 
8. Antennas and directly related facilities used exclusively for communication by 
federally licensed amateur radio operators are exempt from this Section 6.6. 
9. Equipment Shelters/Base Facilities (“shelter”) shall be designed to match other 
accessory buildings on the site, shall be compatible with the surrounding area, or 
constructed underground where possible, or camouflaged by the planting of an 
evergreen hedge not less than 75 percent of the height of the structure at the time of 
planting and shall be used only for the housing of equipment related to the particular 
site but may be used by more than one carrier. Only one such shelter shall be allowed 
per WCF. 
10. Clustering of several wireless communications facilities on an individual lot may be 
allowed if the Planning Board finds that the visual and aesthetic impact on 
surrounding residential neighborhoods or dwellings would not be significantly more 
detrimental than having only a single wireless communications facility. 
C. Setbacks. 
1. For new construction regardless of the yard setbacks required under this Bylaw, in the 
applicable zoning district, monopoles and accessory structures shall be set back from 
all property lines at least the vertical height of the monopole structure, including other 
antennas and appurtenances, as measured from the base of said structure, plus 10 feet. 
There shall be no exception to this provision. 
2. To preserve the character of residential neighborhoods and to minimize the associated 
negative visual images and auditory impacts on adjacent property and its value, and to 
minimize accessibility of the equipment storage facilities to children, WCFs 
regardless of sited zoning district shall not be placed within 250 feet of adjacent 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-10 
residential dwellings, and 800 feet of adjacent public schools and 250 feet of all 
municipal buildings which house employees for their scheduled working hours. This 
measurement is taken from the base of the structure and the equipment storage 
facility to the nearest point of such residential dwellings. 
D. Fall Zone. 
1. All free-standing towers shall maintain a fall zone of at least the height of the tower 
plus 10 feet from any adjacent building or structures not associated with the 
telecommunications facility. Antennas, panels, whip antennas, satellite dishes, which 
are attached to existing structures or erected on building tops will comply with a 
direct fall zone area as described in the second and third bullets directly below. 
2. All side/surface antenna and satellite dishes which are attached to existing 
structures/building mount shall have a fall zone directly below the antenna, as 
measured from the base of the structure/building to which it is attached, equal to one-
half (½) the height of the antenna above ground level (AGL) to protect against falling 
debris such as ice. 
3. All rooftop antenna mounts and satellite dishes erected on building tops shall have a 
fall zone surrounding the antenna equal to the height of the antenna as measured from 
its base to the highest point in a radius. Facilities mounted on rooftops shall be 
stepped back the height of the antenna from the facade to limit the impact on the 
building silhouette. 
4. Antenna mounts and satellite dishes attached to structures shall comply with the 
individual applicable fall zone requirements for the structure identified within this 
Bylaw or the height of the structure plus 10 feet including antenna extensions, 
whichever is greater. 
 
E. Height Criteria. 
1. All freestanding towers shall be designed to be constructed at the minimum height 
necessary to accommodate the anticipated and future users. The maximum allowed 
height of towers in their respective zoning districts shall be as follows unless the 
applicant demonstrates that a greater height is required to allow for provision of the 
wireless communications services or unless the Planning Board finds that co-location 
on said tower is both practical and preferable.  
a. Town owned property, excluding school locations and all municipal buildings which 
house employees for their scheduled working hours – the maximum height allowed 
for structures in the underlying zoning district plus 10 feet.  
b. Industrial District –180 feet.  
c. Commercial Business and General Business Districts 80 feet.  
d. Neighborhood Business Districts – 60 feet  
e. Village, Neighborhood and Rural Residential Districts – 45 feet 
2. A Wireless Communication Facility may be attached to an existing structure/building, 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-11 
if the structure/building meets the height requirements of this Bylaw in the applicable 
zoning district or met the height requirements of the Bylaw when built 
(nonconforming building/structure) or received a separate special permit pursuant to 
Section 9 of this Bylaw. 
3. No tower, including the antenna attached thereto, shall significantly exceed the height 
requirements set forth under this Bylaw in the applicable zoning district. Significantly 
for this purpose is defined as “no higher than 10’ above the height limitation 
contained herein. If there are no structures/buildings within 250 feet of the proposed 
facility, such facility shall be no higher than 10 feet above the average tree canopy 
height, measured from ground level (AGL). 
4. Antennas or panels, which are located on non-residential buildings/structures, shall be 
mounted to be less than 12 feet in height above the roofline of the building/structure. 
Dish antennas shall be dimensionally proportional to mount area. Panels shall be no 
more than 7 feet in height. 
F. Camouflage. 
1. All towers, associated equipment, antennas, buildings, structures, and appurtenances 
shall be painted, treated, shielded, or camouflaged to blend in with the landscape or 
resemble an architectural feature of the building or structure on which they are 
placed. 
2. To the extent that any WCF extends above the height of the vegetation immediately 
surrounding it, it shall be painted light gray or light blue which blends with the sky/ 
clouds /skyline and horizon. 
3. All WCFs shall be sited to minimize visibility from abutting streets and nearby 
buildings and to limit the need to remove existing vegetation. If deemed applicable by 
the SPGA, WCFs shall provide a year-round vegetated buffer of sufficient height and 
depth to effectively screen the WCF. 
G. Security. Accessory structures and equipment required for the operation of WCFs, 
including but not limited to, batteries, generators, electric, and electronic equipment shall 
be secured from unauthorized entry or trespass by means of a locked enclosure. Said 
enclosure shall be consistent and compatible with the provisions of the zoning district in 
which the facility is located. 
H. Lighting. WCFs shall be lighted only if required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
No exterior night lighting of WCFs is permitted except for manually operated emergency 
lights for use when operating personnel are on site and shall be shielded from abutting 
properties. There shall be total cutoff of all light at the lot lines of the site of the WCF. 
I. Signage. Signs shall be limited to those needed to identify property owner/operator, a 24-
hour emergency number, and to warn of any danger. All signs shall be consistent with the 
sign requirements of Section 10.2 of this Bylaw. Advertisement on any antenna, tower, 
fencing, accessory building or equipment is prohibited. 
J. Parking. The SPGA shall determine the maximum and minimum parking space ratio and 
access road requirements based on the character of the proposed use. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-12 
K. Interference. No interference to existing television, cable television, on-line phone 
components, hearing or health assisting devices, electronic or electrical equipment or 
radio signals, including police, fire, public safety and ambulance systems shall be 
permitted from the tower or related components. If interference occurs, it shall be the 
responsibility of the facility owner/operators to correct the problem within 30 days. 
L. Emissions. 
1. All equipment proposed for the WCF shall comply with the most current Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) guidelines (Guidelines of Evaluating the 
Environmental Effects of Radiofrequency Radiation). 
2. An independent engineer hired by the Planning Board at the owner’s expense shall 
conduct annual random testing of all emissions for all sites. Timely test results will be 
submitted to the Town. The WCF emissions must comply with FCC RF standards, or 
services shall be immediately terminated. 
3. The applicant shall provide a certification from an RF engineer listing the existing 
and maximum future projected measurements of all emissions, including RFR, from 
the proposed WCF, for the following situations and that those emissions meet FCC 
Guidelines: 
a. Existing, or ambient: the measurements of existing emissions. 
b. Existing plus proposed WCF: maximum estimate of emissions from the proposed 
personal WCF plus the existing emissions environment. 
4. Within 90 days upon the WCF becoming operational, and annually from the date of 
issuance of the special permits thereafter, the applicant shall submit, measurements of 
emissions from the wireless facility. Such measurements shall be signed by a RF 
engineer, stating the RFR measurements are accurate and meet FCC Guidelines as 
specified in the Radiofrequency Standards section of the Guideline. 
M. Noise. 
1. WCFs shall not generate noise from equipment and/or wind more than the following 
Noise Standards: 
 
 
 
RECEIVING PROPERTY 
CATEGORY 
 
 
Residential property, or 
residential portion of a 
multi-use property 
Commercial facility, public 
service facility, non-residential 
portion of a multi-use property, 
or community service 
facility 
TIME 7am-9pm 9 pm-7am 24 hours 
Maximum A-Weighted 
sound level standard, dB 
50 
40 65 
 
Notes to Table: 
 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-13 
• Acoustical terminology referred to in this bylaw relative to these Noise Standards are as defined in 
ANSI S1.1- 1994(R1999) American National Standard Acoustical Terminology. 
 
• Sound level meter specifications referred to in this bylaw relative to these Noise Standards are as 
defined in “ANSI S1.4A-1983 (R1997) Amendment 1 – American National Standard 
Specification for Sound Level Meters” 
 
• American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards referred to relative to these Noise 
Standards shall be superseded by the latest available versions. 
 
2. The Noise Standards apply at the nearest property line for both ground-mounted and 
roof and side/surface mounted WCFs. 
3. Sound shall be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, 
routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, 
design, maximum, and fluctuating rates. 
4. Measurements shall be collected with a Sound Level Meter, integrating sound level 
meter or dosimeter used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to Type 1 or 
Type 2 standards as specified in the latest version of ANSI Standard S1.4-1983. 
5. The measuring instrument must be calibrated using a calibrator recommended by the 
measuring instrument manufacturer before and after each series of readings. The 
measuring instrument must be re-certified and the calibrator must be re-calibrated at 
least once each year by the manufacturer or by a person that has been approved by the 
manufacturer. A copy of written documentation of such re-certification and re-
calibration shall be kept with the equipment to which it refers. 
6. No outdoor measurements shall be taken: 
a. During periods when wind speeds (including gusts) exceed 15 miles per hour; 
b. Without a windscreen, recommended by the measuring instrument manufacturer, 
properly attached to the measuring instrument; 
c. Under any condition that allows the measuring instrument to become wet (e.g., rain, 
snow or condensation); or 
d. When the ambient temperature is out of the range of the tolerance of the measuring 
instrument. 
7. The report for each measurement session shall include: 
a. The date, day of the week, and times at which measurements are take; 
b. The times of calibration; 
c. The weather conditions; 
d. The identification of all monitoring equipment by manufacturer, model number and 
serial number; 
e. The normal operating cycle of the sources in question with a description of the 
sources; 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-14 
f. The ambient sound level, in dB (A), with the sources in question operating; 
g. The background sound level, in dB (A), without the sources in question operating; 
and 
h. A sketch of the measurement site, including measurement locations and relevant 
distances, containing sufficient information for another investigator to repeat the 
measurements under similar conditions. 
8. When measuring continuous sound, or sound that is sustained for more than 1 second 
at a time, the measuring instrument shall be set for A-weighting, slow response, and 
the range (if the measuring instrument is designed to read levels over different 
ranges) shall be set to that range in which the meter reads closest to the middle of the 
scale. The minimum and maximum readings shall be recorded to indicate the range of 
monitored values along with the central tendency average most often displayed. The 
measuring instrument shall be placed at a minimum height of 3 feet above the ground 
or from any reflective surface. When handheld, the microphone shall be held at arm’s 
length and pointed at the source at the angle recommended by the measuring 
instruments’ manufacturer. The monitoring session should last for a period sufficient 
to ensure that the sound levels measured are typical of the source in question. 
9. The applicant shall provide, as part of its Special Permit Application, a statement 
listing the existing (pre-development) and maximum future projected measurements 
of noise from the proposed wireless service facilities, measured in decibels, for the 
following: 
a. Existing, or ambient: the measurements of existing noise. 
b. Existing plus proposed personal wireless service facilities: maximum estimate of 
noise from the proposed personal wireless service facility plus the existing noise 
environment. 
c. Such statement shall be certified and signed by an acoustical engineer, stating that 
noise measurements are accurate and meet the Noise Standards listed above. 
10. Within 90 days upon the WCF becoming operational, and annually (semi-annually if 
the WCF is Located within 250 feet of a residential dwelling or within 800 feet of a 
public school or 250 feet from a municipal building which houses employees for their 
scheduled working hours) from the date of issuance of the special permit, the 
applicant shall submit noise measurements from WCF. An acoustical engineer, 
engaged by the SPGA at the applicant’s expense, shall certify that noise 
measurements are accurate and meet the standards established in this bylaw. 
11. If noise levels exceed the limits specified herein, the source of the noise emission 
shall be immediately terminated. Operations shall not continue until the entity 
responsible for the operation of the WCF corrects any such noise violation. 
12. For the Construction period the applicant shall describe, as part of the Special Permit 
application, how noise will be controlled during construction. Noise limits at any 
residential boundary shall not exceed 65 dB(A) during the construction period, which 
will be limited to 8:00 AM to 6:00 PM Monday through Friday. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-15 
N. Environmental. 
1. The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) applies to all applications for 
wireless services facilities. The FCC via procedures adopted as Subpart l, Section 
1.1301 et seq, administers NEPA. (47 CRF, Ch. I). The FCC requires that an 
environmental assessment (EA) be filed with the FCC prior to beginning operations 
for any WCF proposed in or involving any of the following: Wilderness areas, 
wildlife preserves, endangered species habitat, historical site, Indian religious site, 
flood plain, wetlands, high-intensity white lights in residential neighborhoods and 
excessive Radiofrequency radiation exposure. 
2. At the time of application filing, an EA that meets FCC requirements shall be 
submitted to the Town for each WCF site that requires such an EA to be submitted to 
the FCC. 
3. The applicant shall list the location, type, and amount (including trace elements) of 
any materials considered hazardous by the federal, state, and local governments and 
proposed for use with the wireless service facility. 
4. The Planning Board may waive one or more of the application filing requirements of 
this section if it finds that such information is not needed for a thorough review of a 
proposed WCF. 
O. Co-Location. 
1. Licensed carriers shall share WCF sites where feasible and appropriate, thereby 
reducing the number of WCFs that are stand-alone facilities. 
2. All applicants for a special permit for a WCF shall demonstrate a good faith effort to 
co-locate with other carriers if applicable and appropriate. Such good faith effort 
includes: 
a. A survey of all existing structures that may be feasible sites for co-locating WCFs. 
b. Contact with all licensed carriers for WCFs operating in the county; and 
c. Sharing information necessary to determine if co-location is feasible under the 
design configuration most accommodating to co-location. 
3. The SPGA may retain a technical expert in the field of RF engineering, at the 
applicant’s expense, to verify if co- location at the site is feasible and the design 
configuration most accommodating to co-location. 
4. Carriers proposing co-locating shall provide certification by an RF engineer 
demonstrating the appropriateness of co-location. 
P. Aesthetics. 
1. The applicant shall submit existing condition photos and superimposed proposed 
photos showing what will be seen from the nearest abutter lot line. 
2. The applicant shall arrange, at its own expense, for a balloon or crane test at the 
proposed site to illustrate the height of the proposed facility. The date, time and 
location of such test shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-16 
Town at least 14 days, but not more than 21 days prior to the test. 
Q. Cessation. 
1. A special permit issued for any WCF shall be valid for a fixed or conditioned period 
as determined by the SPGA or a maximum 20 years. At the expiration of the permit, 
the WCF shall be removed by the owner or a new special permit shall be required. 
2. No less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations of a 
WCF, the owner shall notify the Town by certified mail of the proposed date of 
abandonment or discontinuation. 
3. All structures and/or equipment erected for providing WCS shall be removed within 6 
months of cessation of use at the owner’s expense. Removal shall include, but not be 
limited to the removal of all equipment necessary for the operation of wireless 
communication services by a WCF; disposal of waste materials and the restoration of 
the location to its natural condition, grading and landscaping. 
4. If a carrier fails to remove a WCF in accordance with this section, the Town shall 
have the authority to enter the site and physically remove the WCF. A bond or other 
form of financial security posted at the issuance of a building permit may be required 
to cover the costs of removal and restoration. 
R. Maintenance. The applicant and co-applicant shall maintain the WCF in good condition. 
Such maintenance shall include, but shall not be limited to painting, structural integrity of 
the mount and security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer area and landscaping. 
S. Modifications. Any proposed change in technology for an existing WCS, adjusted power 
input or output change, extension in height, the addition of cells, antennas, panels, or 
carriers, or construction or modification of a new or replacement WCF shall require a 
new application for a special permit in accordance with Section 4.3 of this Bylaw. 
T. Specifications. The applicant shall follow the application process set forth under Section 
4.3 of this Bylaw and the rules and regulations of the Planning Board and shall submit 
complete, dated and revised documentation to demonstrate compliance with this section. 
The applicant shall submit the following: 
1. Evidence that the applicant has filed a notice of proposed construction with the 
Federal Aviation Administration if the proposed facility exceeds 200 feet in height or 
in the event such notice is otherwise required. 
2. The special permit holder shall file annual certification demonstrating continuing 
compliance with the standards of the Federal Communications Commission, Federal 
Aviation Administration and the American National Standards Institute and required 
maintenance with the Inspector of Buildings. 
3. Copies of all applicable permits, including but not limited to all State and Federal 
permits required for this project and a certification of compliance with the terms and 
provisions of the license issued for this purpose by the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC). 
4. All WCF carriers shall periodically file information with the Town, upon request of 
the SPGA, information of the operational aspects of the facility including but not 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-17 
limited to:  
a. Power consumption,  
b. Power radiation,  
c. Noise compliance,  
d. Frequency transmission;  
e. The number, location, and orientation of antenna; and  
f. Types of services provided. 
5. Two photographic super-impositions of the WCF within the subject property. 
Photographic superimpositions shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment 
shelters and related equipment, cables as well as cable runs, access roads, parking, 
and security barrier, if any. 
6. In addition, the applicant shall submit the following: 
a. The number, type, and functional description of antenna proposed. The frequency 
modulation and class of service; 
b. The direction of the maximum lobes; 
c. Equipment brochures for the proposed WCF such as manufacturer’s specifications or 
trade journal reprints for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelter, cables as well as 
cable runs, and security barrier, if any; 
d. A description of all WCF related fixtures, including but not limited to electronic and 
electric equipment generators, battery packs, power cabinets, transceivers, etc. , 
appurtenances and apparatus, structures including height, materials, color and 
lighting; 
e. Materials of the proposed WCF specified by generic type and specific treatment 
(e.g., anodized aluminum, stained wood, painted fiberglass, etc.). These shall be 
provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters and related equipment, cables 
as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any; 
f. Colors of the proposed WCF represented by a color board showing actual colors 
proposed. Colors shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters and 
related equipment, cables as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any; and 
g. Dimensions of the WCF specified for all three directions: height, width and breadth. 
These shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters including but 
not limited to electronic and electric equipment, generators, battery packs, power 
cabinets, transceivers, etc., and security barrier if any. 
7. A construction bond or other form of financial security posted at the issuance of a 
building permit may be required to ensure that the WCF is built as documented before 
the SPGA and meets all SPGA requirements. 
U. Application Specifications.  
1. A report shall be submitted by the applicant, including, but not limited to, the 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-18 
following: 
a. A locus-context map of all land within 500 feet of any part of the tract. 
b. Property lot lines for subject property and all adjacent properties within 500 feet. 
c. All dwellings and principal buildings located on the site and all within 250 feet of 
the proposed WCF. Gross floor area of all non-residential buildings and elevations. 
d. The land use of each lot and total land area including developable site area, common 
or usable open space, if any. 
e. Location of rights-of way, roads; public and private, on said property and adjacent 
properties within 500 feet. Area ratio of all impervious surfaces. 
f. Proposed changes for temporary or permanent roads and driveways. 
g. Existing contours at two-foot intervals for subject property and adjacent property 
within 500 feet. 
h. Principal natural features in general such as: significant rock outcroppings, tree 
cover, dominant species, average heights of vegetation, water systems (including 
standing surface water, brooks or streams, the direction of drainage, wetlands, and 
the 100-year flood elevation.). Significant vegetation (including mature trees, unique 
specimens of vegetation, and vegetation that indicates wetness. 
i. Zoning district boundaries. 
j. Recorded easements on the site and within the 500’ locus. 
k. Public facilities, such as conservation or recreation land, footpaths, bicycle paths, or 
streets within 500’ of the site. 
l. Significant noise/visual impact (including views from the site and sources of noise 
affecting thesite.) 
m. Historically or architecturally significant structures and sites on the site. 
n. Proposed location of antenna mount and equipment shelter. 
o. Proposed security barrier indicating type and extent as well as point of controlled 
entry. 
p. Grading and landscape plan including existing trees and shrubs and those to be 
removed or added, identified by size of specimen at installation and species. Grade 
changes, cuts and fills, to be shown as original grade and new grade line, with 2-foot 
contours above mean sea level. 
q. The proposed drainage system. 
2. The application for a Special Permit shall be prepared in bylaw order. 
3. The Planning Board shall provide a check list of what is required in an application for 
a WCF Special Permit. A potential WCF vendor shall obtain this checklist before 
applying for a Special Permit and shall by signature of an authorized agent affirm its 
reception to the Planning Board. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-19 
4. A WCF vendor, at the time of submittal of their application, shall verify with an 
authorized agent of the Planning Board that all information identified in the checklist 
is contained in the application. The checklist shall be used to verify all information 
required is provided. 
V. Approval Criteria.  
1. A special permit may be granted under this section only if the Planning Board finds 
the project complies with the purpose, intent, and criteria contained in this Section 6.6 
and Section 4.3 of this Bylaw. In addition, the Planning Board shall make the 
applicable findings before granting the special permit as follows: 
a. That the applicant is not already providing adequate coverage or is unable to provide 
adequate coverage as defined within the contents of this Bylaw; 
b. That the applicant is using the most preferred site available, see Section 6.6B; 
c. That the proposed wireless communications services and facility minimizes and does 
not substantially adversely impact any historic resources, scenic views, residential 
property values, and natural or man-made resources. The Planning Board shall 
consider the cumulative impact of all related applications in the same geographic 
area; 
d. That the applicant has agreed to implement all reasonable measures to mitigate the 
potential adverse impacts of the facilities, including but not limited to, the aesthetic 
and auditory concerns of the residential neighborhoods; 
e. That the applicant has agreed to rent or lease available space on any tower it controls 
within Billerica or its contiguous towns, when appropriate and applicable, as 
determined by the Planning Board or supportive documentation submitted by the 
applicant, under the terms of a fair-market lease, without discrimination to other 
providers to the extent it is technically feasible.; 
f. That the facility shall comply with the appropriate FCC regulations regarding 
emissions and arrangements for monitoring said emissions; and 
g. That there is a substantial gap in telecommunications service and the proposal is the 
least intrusive means to fill the gap. 
2. If a special permit is granted, in addition to such terms and conditions as may be 
authorized by this Bylaw, the Planning Board may impose such additional conditions 
and safeguards as public safety, welfare and convenience may require. 
W. Denial Criteria. 
1. Should the applicant substantially fail to meet any of the requirements set forth in this 
Section 6.6, then the Special Permit shall be denied. 
2. The Planning Board shall deny a special permit to an applicant that has not 
demonstrated a good faith effort to provide for co-location if applicable and 
appropriate. 
3. A special permit shall not be denied if the denial of the special permit would 
unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services. Note 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 6-20 
that only “unreasonable" discrimination among providers is prohibited, and that the 
Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 allows facilities that create different visual, 
aesthetic or safety concerns to be treated differently. 
4. A special permit shall not be denied if the denial of the special permit would prohibit, 
or have the effect of prohibiting, the provision of personal wireless services within the 
town of Billerica. Note that applications to construct a WCF in an under-served area, 
if the service gap can be filled by less intrusive means, may still be denied. The 
Planning Board shall not use this clause for granting of the special permit unless an 
independent assessment of the applicant’s proposal is certified by an independent RF 
engineer, hired by the Town at the applicant’s expense, stating that the applicant 
cannot build a town-wide network without this site. 
  
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-1 
Section 7. Required Findings for Special Permit Uses 
 
Where designated in the Table of Uses, the following uses may be approved by special permit 
from the Board of Appeals or Planning Board, or by special permit with site plan approval by the 
Planning Board, subject to the findings and requirements provided in this Section 7.   
 
7.1 Conservation, Agricultural, and Outdoor Recreation Uses 
A. Outdoor Recreation. Required findings: 
1. The use will not be detrimental to the neighborhood in which it is located; 
2. The use will not create adverse traffic conditions in the area in which it is located; 
3. The hours of operation of the use are compatible with the uses in the neighborhood; 
4. Parking and access for the use are adequate; and 
5. The use will not result in objectionable noise, lighting, or fumes. 
7.2 Public, Institutional Uses 
A. Cemetery. Required findings: 
1. The use will not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood 
2. The use will not create traffic or parking congestion that will adversely affect the 
neighborhood 
B. Nursing Home. Required findings: 
1. The minimum lot size is five acres in the residential districts and three acres in the 
business and industrial districts; 
2. Buildings are set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property line 
3. The minimum lot frontage is 150 feet; 
4. The maximum lot coverage is 25 percent; 
5. There is one parking space for each employee on the maximum shift and one parking 
space for every three beds; 
6. Adequate site circulation is provided to and from the site, taking into consideration 
the adjacent sidewalks and streets and the accessibility of the site and buildings 
thereon for emergency vehicles; 
7. The facility meets the green strips and green space requirements of this Bylaw; 
8. The facility is serviced by public water and sewer of sufficient capacity to serve the 
facility; 
9. The nursing home will not constitute a hazard or a nuisance; 
10. The nursing home will conserve the public health, safety, convenience, morals and 
welfare; and 
11. The nursing home will not have a detrimental or injurious effect on the neighborhood. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-2 
7.3 Non-Profit, Philanthropic Uses 
A. Club, Lodge, Other Philanthropic Use; Required Findings: 
1. The use is compatible with the surrounding area 
2. Traffic increase will not be detrimental to the surrounding area 
3. Adequate delivery and loading is provided 
4. The use is not obnoxious, hazardous, or injurious to the neighborhood or property in 
the vicinity of the use 
5. Any use of the club for fairs, bazaars, antique shows, or similar events are with the 
owner’s permission and are conducted on the same lot as the principal use or on an 
adjacent lot in the same ownership and in the same zoning district 
7.4 Residential Uses 
A. Affordable Housing on Undersized Lots; Required Findings:  
1. The purpose of Section 7.4A is to allow the construction of single-family dwelling 
units by special permit from the Board of Appeals on lots that do not meet the current 
lot dimensional requirements of this Bylaw. Dwellings approved under this Section 
7.4A shall be affordable to families and shall be compatible with prevailing 
residential densities in the neighborhood where they are to be built. 
2. The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit subject to the following findings: 
a. The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet in the Village Residence District; 
20,000 square feet in the Neighborhood Residence District; and 25,000 in the Rural 
Residence District. 
b. The lot area in all districts shall be at least 50 percent of the minimum area required 
under this Bylaw. 
c. The minimum lot frontage shall be 75 feet. 
d. The applicant shall demonstrate that the majority of lots developed with single-
family dwellings within 300 feet of the subject property lines have less area than the 
minimum required under current zoning. The applicant shall submit a map of all lots 
within the 300-foot perimeter of the lot and the existing lot areas. Undeveloped 
parcels and non-single-family dwellings shall not be counted. 
e. All single-family dwellings built under this provision shall be affordable as defined 
elsewhere in this Section 7.4A. In those cases where more than one lot is created 
under the provisions of the subdivision control law, all lots created shall be utilized 
as affordable unless a particular lot conforms to all current lot dimensional 
requirements. In that case, the conforming lot does not have to be affordable. 
Variances shall not be considered in satisfying compliance under this provision. 
f. Applicants seeking approval shall agree to sign a recordable deed restriction that will 
guarantee that the subject dwelling(s) will remain affordable in perpetuity. Such 
restriction shall be approved by the town and reviewed by town counsel. 
g. The Billerica Housing Authority (BHA) or other agency qualified by the Select 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-3 
Board shall perform the income verification of the qualified affordable housing unit 
purchaser or tenant. 
h. The BHA or other agency qualified by the Select Board shall be responsible for the 
long-term monitoring of these dwellings. 
i. Dwellings built under this Section 7.4A shall be adequate to accommodate a family 
of three or more. Interior features of affordable units shall comply in all respects 
with the minimum design and construction standards set forth in the Executive 
Office of Housing and Livable Communities (EOHLC) Local Action Units (LAU) 
Guidelines in effect on the date of the special permit application.  
j. There shall be no further exception to the dimensional relief provided by this Section 
7.4A. Failure to meet any provision shall result in the outright invalidation of these 
exceptions. Lots that require variances in addition to the relief outlined here shall not 
qualify under this provision. 
k. The BHA or other agency qualified by the Select Board shall administer purchaser 
or tenant selection. The town reserves the right to apply a local preference in the 
selection process. 
3. Unless described herein all other district restrictions shall apply to the applicable 
lot(s). 
4. The Board of Appeals may condition the granting of this special permit to address 
any potential impacts on the surrounding neighborhood. 
B. Assisted Living Residence. Required findings: 
1. The minimum lot size is five acres in the residential districts and three acres in the 
business and industrial districts’ 
2. The maximum density is 12 units/acre; 
3. Buildings are set back a minimum of 50 feet from all property lines and no building is 
closer than 200 feet to an existing residential dwelling’ 
4. The minimum lot frontage is 150 feet; 
5. The maximum lot coverage is 25 percent; 
6. There is one parking space for each employee on the maximum shift and one parking 
space for every three assisted living units; 
7. Adequate site circulation is provided to and from the site, taking into consideration 
the adjacent sidewalks and streets and the accessibility of the site and buildings 
thereon for emergency vehicles; 
8. The facility meets the green strips and green space requirements of this Bylaw; and 
9. The facility is serviced by public water and sewer of sufficient capacity to serve the 
facility. 
C.  Two-Family Dwelling. Required findings: 
1. The proposed use meets all dimensional and parking requirements of this Bylaw; and 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-4 
2. The proposed use is not detrimental to the character of the neighborhood where it is 
located. 
7.5 Business and Commercial Uses; Retail 
A. Garden Shop. Required findings:   
1. All dust, noise, or other objectionable effects of the use are confined to the premises. 
B. Greenhouse, non-agricultural. Required findings:  
1. The use is compatible with the surrounding area; 
2. Traffic increase will not be detrimental to the surrounding area; and 
3. Adequate delivery and loading is provided. 
C. Open Air Sales. Required findings: 
1. The use does not include salvage materials; 
2. All dust, noise, or other objectionable effects of the use are confined to the premises 
containing the use; and 
3. The use is not hazardous by reason of the potential for fire, explosion, radiation 
release, or other casualty. 
D. (empty)  Retail Store. Required findings: 
1. The use is compatible with the area where located; 
2. The use does not adversely impact traffic; 
3. There are sufficient loading and unloading facilities; 
4. There is adequate landscaping and buffer to screen the use from surrounding uses; 
5. Adequate garbage and rubbish disposal facilities are located on the property and are 
adequately screened; and 
6. The use is not detrimental to the existing business climate or to future business 
development in the area. 
E. Supermarket. Required findings: 
1. The use complies with the site plan approval requirements of this Bylaw; 
2. The use is not detrimental to the area in which it is located; 
3. All dust, noise, or other objectionable effects of the use are confined to the premises 
containing the use; 
4. The use is not hazardous by reason of the potential for fire, explosion, radiation 
release, or other casualty; 
5. There are sufficient loading and unloading facilities; 
6. The use does not adversely impact traffic; 
7. There is adequate landscaping and buffer to screen the use from surrounding uses; 
and 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-5 
8. Adequate garbage and rubbish disposal facilities are located on the property and are 
adequately screened. 
7.6 Business and Commercial Uses; Services 
A. Dog Kennel. Required Findings: 
1. The activity is not injurious, noxious, or offensive to the senses of the neighborhood 
residents, not limited to client traffic and parking effects; 
2. No Dog Kennel shall be located within 400 feet of a residential dwelling; 
3. There is a maximum of 15 dogs (or a maximum of 20 in the Industrial and 
Commercial Districts) at any one time on the premises; 
4. There shall be a minimum of 40 square feet of recreational space per dog. The 
recreational space may be inside or outside the facility or a combination thereof; 
5. There is a minimum of 1,000 square feet (or a minimum of 1,500 square feet in the 
Industrial and Commercial Districts) of interior gross floor area; 
6. There is a minimum of 1000 square feet (or a minimum of 1,500 square feet in the 
Industrial and Commercial Districts) of exterior space enclosed by an eight-foot non-
chain link fence with the finished surface facing in and a similar gate for the dogs to 
exercise; 
7. There shall always be an attendant on the premises when there are dogs at the site;  
8. The owner of the Commercial Kennel shall comply with all applicable laws related to 
the kenneling of animals; 
9.  The  Commercial Kennel shall be operated as a secondary and subsidiary use of the 
premises by a permanent resident of the premises; and 
10. All kenneled dogs shall be kept indoors between the hours of 9:00 PM and 7:30 AM. 
 
B. Dog Daycare or Dog Training. Required Findings: 
1. The activity is not injurious, noxious, or offensive to the senses of the neighborhood 
residents, not limited to client traffic and parking effects 
2. There is a maximum of 15 dogs at any one time on the premises in the General 
Business District, nor more than 20 dogs at a time on the premises in the Industrial 
and Commercial Districts. A Kennel License for the premises must be maintained in 
good standing, pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, c140, §137A. 
3. There is a minimum of 1,000 square feet of interior gross floor area in the General 
Business District and a minimum of 1,500 square feet in the Industrial and 
Commercial Districts.  
4. There is a minimum of 1,000 square feet of exterior space in the General Business 
District and a minimum of 1,500 square feet of exterior space in the Industrial and 
Commercial Districts, enclosed by an eight-foot non-chain link fence with the 
finished surface facing in and a similar gate for the dogs to exercise. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-6 
5. An attendant is on the premises at all times when there are dogs at the site 
6. There are no dogs on the site before 7:00 6:30 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. in the General 
Business District or before 6:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. in the Industrial and 
Commercial Districts.  
7. F or Dog Training, there shall be no outside on- premises training. 
C. Funeral Home. Required findings: 
1. The use will not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood; 
2. The building or structure is in character with the buildings and structures in the 
neighborhood; and 
3. The use will not create traffic or parking that adversely impacts the neighborhood. 
D. Repair Shop. Required findings: 
1. The use is not detrimental to the area in which it is located; 
2. The use will not result in any odors, fumes, noise, vibrations, chemical spills, or 
hazardous wastes; and 
3. The use will be conducted entirely within a building. 
7.7 Business & Commercial Uses; Accommodations and Food Services 
A. Drive-Up/Drive-Through Restaurant. Required findings: 
1. The customers are served inside the perimeter of a building, enclosure, or canopy; 
2. The green strips and green space as set forth in this Bylaw are complied with; 
3. Adequate safeguards are employed to control the disposal of disposable containers, 
including requirements for the use of biodegradable materials; 
4. The use does not adversely impact traffic or traffic circulation; and 
5. The use is not detrimental to the area in which it is located. 
B. Fast-Order Food Establishment. Required findings: 
1. Adequate safeguards are employed to control the disposal of disposable containers 
including requirements for use of biodegradable materials; and 
2. The use does not adversely impact traffic or traffic circulation. 
3. In addition to B(1) and B(2) above, the following findings are required in the 
Industrial District:  
a. The use is compatible with the area where located; 
b. There are sufficient loading and unloading facilities; 
c. There is adequate landscaping and buffer to screen the use from surrounding uses; 
d. Adequate garbage and rubbish disposal facilities are located on the property and are 
adequately screened; and 
e. The use is not detrimental to the existing business climate or future business 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-7 
development in the area. 
C. Motel or Hotel. Required findings: 
1. The use is located on at least three acres of land; 
2. The use has a minimum of 100 guest rooms or suites; 
3. Open space is provided on the lot in addition to any area required for parking and 
associated driveways, equal to twice the gross ground floor area of the hotel or motel; 
4. Rooms or suites of rooms shall not contain cooking facilities unless specifically 
permitted by the Board;  
5. In addition to C(1) through C(4) above, the following findings shall be required: in 
the Industrial District: 
a. The use is not detrimental to the area in which it is located 
b. The use will not result in any odors, fumes, noise, vibrations, chemical spills, or 
hazardous wastes 
c. The use will be conducted entirely within a building. 
D. Restaurant. Required findings: 
1. The use is compatible with the surrounding area; 
2. The food is consumed by persons at tables within the building; 
3. The food is served on chinaware and beverages are served in glasses or china cups; 
4. The incidental sale of food is restricted to “take out,” and adequate safeguards are 
employed to control the disposal of disposable containers; 
5. Traffic increase will not be detrimental to the surrounding area; 
6. Adequate delivery and loading is provided. 
7. In addition to D(1) through D(6) above, in the Industrial Commercial District, the 
Board shall find that: 
a. Adequate garbage and rubbish disposal facilities are located on the property and are 
adequately screened;  
b. There are sufficient loading and unloading facilities;  
c. There is adequate landscaping and buffer to screen the use from surrounding uses; 
and 
d. The use is not detrimental to the existing business climate. 
7.8 Business & Commercial Uses; Financial, Offices 
A.  (empty) Bank. Required findings: 
1. The use is compatible with other uses in the area where located; and 
2. There is adequate landscaping and buffer to screen the use from surrounding uses. 
7.9 Business & Commercial Uses; Amusement, Recreation Businesses 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-8 
A. Golf Course. Required findings: 
1. The proposed golf course shall be located on a minimum of 10 acres; and 
2. All accessory uses, if any, shall meet the special permit requirements for those uses as 
set forth in this Bylaw.  
B. Riding Stable. Required findings: 
1. The use will not be detrimental to the neighborhood in which it is located; 
2. The hours of operation of the use are compatible with the uses in the neighborhood; 
and 
3. Parking and access for the use are adequate. 
C. Swimming Pool (non-accessory). Required findings: 
1. The use will not be detrimental to the neighborhood in which it is located; 
2. The hours of operation of the use are compatible with the uses in the neighborhood; 
and 
3. Parking and access for the use are adequate. 
7.10 Business & Commercial Uses; Unclassified 
A. Fully Automated Business. Required findings: 
1. The use is not detrimental to the area in which it is located; 
2. The use does not adversely impact on traffic or traffic circulation; and 
3. The use is compatible with other uses in the area. 
B. Research Facility. Required findings for a special permit in the Neighborhood Business 
District: 
1. The use complies with the site plan approval requirements of this Bylaw; 
2. The use will not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood; 
3. The building or structure is in character with the buildings and structures in the 
neighborhood; 
4. The use will not create traffic or parking that adversely impacts the neighborhood; 
5. The use is compatible with other uses in the area; 
6. The use is not detrimental due to the storage or disposal of hazardous wastes and 
materials, flammable liquids, or highly combustible or explosive materials; 
7. Adequate disposal for all types of wastes is provided; 
8. The use will not subject other uses in the area to hazards affecting health, safety, or 
the general welfare; and 
9. The use will neither impair the integrity or character of the district or adjoining 
districts, nor be detrimental to the public health, convenience, or welfare. 
 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-9 
7.11 Business & Commercial Uses; Vehicle-Related Businesses 
A. Auto Repair, Auto Service, or Auto Washing. Required findings:  
1. No proposed facility shall be located closer than 1,300 feet from another similar 
business.  
2. Auto Repair, additional finding: all repairs, except minor repairs, shall be conducted 
entirely within a building housing the use. 
3. Auto Service, additional finding, all maintenance and service, other than minor 
service at the island and emergency repairs, shall be conducted entirely within a 
building. 
B. Auto Sales. Required findings: 
1. The use is not detrimental to the area in which it is located; and 
2. The use is not located within 1,300 feet of another similar use. 
3. In addition, for Auto Services in the Industrial Zone, the Board shall find the 
following: 
a. Except for minor services which take place outside, all services shall be conducted 
inside a building; 
b. The use will not result in any odors, fumes, noise, vibrations, chemical spills, or 
hazardous wastes; 
c. There are adequate facilities for disposal of rubbish, waste, and hazardous waste and 
materials. 
C. Truck-Related Businesses.  
1. Required findings for Truck Body Work, Truck Leasing, Truck Repair, Truck Sales, 
or Truck Services establishment: 
a. The facility is not within 1,300 feet of another similar business. 
2. For a Truck Body Work establishment:  
a. The facility is not within 1,300 feet of another similar business; and  
b. All body work shall be conducted entirely within a building housing the use. 
3. For a Truck Service establishment:  
a. The facility is not within 1,300 feet of another similar business; and 
b. All maintenance and service, other than minor service at the island and emergency 
repairs, shall be conducted entirely within a building. 
7.12 Industrial Uses; Manufacturing and Related Uses. 
A. Light Manufacturing. Required findings: 
1. All disturbing smoke, fumes, dust, odors, and noise are confined to the premises; 
2. No operations constitute a hazard by reason of the potential for fire, explosion, 
radiation release, or other casualty; 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-10 
3. In the General Business and Commercial Districts, manufacturing shall consist only 
of products primarily for sale at retail on the premises where manufactured and there 
shall be no more than five full-time employees or their equivalent; 
4. The use will not be noxious, offensive, or detrimental to the neighborhood or to the 
Town by reason of special danger of fire or explosion; pollution of waterways; or 
emission of corrosive, toxic, or noisome fumes, gas, smoke, soot, obnoxious dust, 
disagreeable orders, offensive noises, vibrations, or other objectionable 
characteristics; and 
5. Warehouse and storage are accessory to the principal use. 
B. Wholesale. Required findings: 
1. The use will not be noxious, offensive or detrimental to the surrounding 
neighborhood or to the Town due to vehicular traffic, noise or operation during early 
morning or late-night hours;  
2. Accessory storage use allowed only of products available for wholesale sale from the 
premises;  
3. The use is not detrimental to the area in which it is located; and 
4. The hours of operation are tailored to safeguard against early morning and late-night 
disturbance of residents in nearby neighborhood. 
5. Subsections B1 and B2 above shall not apply in the Industrial District.  
7.13 Industrial Uses; Utilities 
A. Above-Ground, Non-Municipal Utilities. Required finding: the proposed use is not 
detrimental to the neighborhood.  
B. Earth Migration.  
1. Permitted as of Right. Earth migration less than 500 cubic yards shall be certified by a 
registered professional civil engineer or certified professional land surveyor for: 
a. Construction or repair of roads, utilities, public works, and infrastructure 
b. Installation or repair of underground sewage disposal systems 
c. Excavation for foundations 
2. Special permit required findings: 
a. The use is undertaken only during Monday through Friday, 7:00 AM to 6:00 PM, 
excluding holidays; 
b. Adequate plans are in place for cleaning of spillage, including provision of the 
responsible person for remedying spillage together with an address and telephone 
number; 
c. The site treatment plan is adequate to control dust and mud; 
d. The site plan calls for use of six inches of packed loam and vegetation to be planted 
on the surfaces of all disturbed areas; and 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-11 
e. All slopes are created or constructed in the public interest to preserve the health, 
safety and welfare of the abutters, abutters to abutters, and the public. 
7.14 Industrial Uses; Other 
A. Contractor’s Yard. Required findings: 
1. The use is not detrimental to the area in which it is located; 
2. The use will not result in any odors, fumes, noise, vibrations, chemical spills, or 
hazardous wastes; and 
3. In the Commercial District, these additional findings are required: 
a. The facility is not within 1,300 feet of another similar business, and 
b. All body work shall be conducted entirely within a building housing the use. 
7.15 Accessory Uses; Residential 
A. Home Occupation. In any district where a home occupation is allowed as of right or by 
special permit, the following regulations shall apply. 
1. The activity shall be administered or operated as a secondary and subsidiary use of 
the premises by a permanent resident of the premises. 
2. There are no non-residents employed unless authorized by the Special Permit 
Granting Authority. 
3. The activity is not injurious, noxious, or offensive to the senses of the neighborhood 
residents, not limited to client traffic and parking effects. 
4. There shall be no externally visible alterations or additions that alter the residential 
character of the premises. 
B. In-law Apartment. Required findings: 
1. The living quarters are separate but located in the principal building; 
2. The living quarters do not exceed 800 square feet; 
3. There are no more than two related persons as occupants; 
4. There is sufficient off-street parking for the use; 
5. The principal building in which the use is located retains its single-family dwelling 
appearance; and 
6. The use shall not continue upon vacation of the premises by the occupants. 
C. Room Rentals (more than 5). Required Findings: 
1. Whether permitted by right or allowed by special permit, room rentals shall be 
restricted to owner-occupied dwellings. 
D. Storage of More Than One Vehicle or Trailer. Required Findings: 
1. Storage shall take place in the rear yard only. 
7.16 Accessory Uses; Nonresidential 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 7-12 
A. Accessory Retail and Automotive Services. Required findings: 
1. The use is incidental and accessory to the principal use; 
2. The accessory use does not comprise more than 10 percent of the total gross floor 
area of the principal use or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
B. Accessory Uses to Scientific Research or Development. Required Findings: 
1. Granting of a special permit shall be subject to a finding that the proposed accessory 
use does not substantially derogate from the public good. 
C. Accessory Service and Repair. See Section 7.11 for Required findings. 
 
7.17 Accessory Uses; Miscellaneous 
A. Auto Parking. Required findings:  
1. No proposed facility shall be located closer than 1,300 feet from another similar 
business.  
B. Garaging or Parking of Commercial Vehicles. Required findings: 
1. Garaging or parking of one heavy commercial vehicle:  
a. The use shall be on the same lot as the principal use or on an adjacent lot in the same 
ownership and in the same district; and  
b. The use is not obnoxious, hazardous, or injurious to the neighborhood or property in 
the vicinity of the use. 
2. Garaging or parking of two light commercial vehicles on a lot. Required findings:  
a. The use shall be on the same lot as the principal use or on an adjacent lot in the same 
ownership and in the same district;  
b. The use is not obnoxious, hazardous, or injurious to the neighborhood or property in 
the vicinity of the use;  
3. Garaging or parking of two or more heavy commercial vehicles on a lot. Required 
findings:  
a. The use shall be on the same lot as the principal use or on an adjacent lot in the same 
ownership and in the same district;  
b. The use is not obnoxious, hazardous, or injurious to the neighborhood or property in 
the vicinity of the use; and 
c. The facility is not within 1,300 feet of another similar business. 
  
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 8-1 
Section 8. Dimensional Regulations 
 
8.1 Purposes  
A. The purpose of Section 8 is to control the density of development in the Town in order to 
carry out the overall purposes of this Bylaw.  
B. No building or structure shall be erected, altered, enlarged, extended, or moved on any 
lot, nor shall any lot containing any building or structure be altered in size or dimension 
except in conformance with Section 8 unless otherwise provided for in this Bylaw or G.L. 
c. 40A. This prohibition shall not apply when a portion of a lot is taken by eminent 
domain or conveyed for a public purpose. 
8.2 Table of Dimensional Requirements 
All buildings and structures shall conform to the Table of Dimensional Requirements as shown 
in Appendix B, Table 2. 
 
8.3 General Regulations 
A. Basic Lot Regulations 
1. In determining the area and frontage of a lot, no land within the limits of a street that 
abuts the lot shall be included, even if the lot owner also has title to such street. 
 
2. If the corner of a corner lot is bounded by a curved line connecting other bounding 
lines that would intersect if extended, the area and frontage shall be computed as if 
the bounding lines were so extended. 
 
3. When a lot in one ownership is situated in part in the Town and in part in an adjacent 
town or city, the provisions, regulations, and restrictions of this Bylaw shall be 

Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 8-2 
applied to that portion of the lot that lies in the Town in the same manner as if the 
entire lot were situated in the Town. 
4. In the case of an easement for high-tension power lines or gas transmission lines, the 
area within the easement shall be added to the minimum lot size for a lot as specified 
in this Bylaw. 
5. All lots shall be so far as possible regular and symmetrical. 
6. All buildable lots shall be able to encompass a circle that touches the frontage and has 
a diameter equal to 80% of the lot’s frontage requirement within the interior of the 
lot.  
 
7. A corner lot or through lot shall have access through one frontage only. 
8. If a lot has more than four lot lines, the additional lot lines shall be deemed to be side 
lot lines unless the Inspector of Buildings determines otherwise. 
9. Except in a Multi-Family District, Townhouse Overlay, or Elderly Housing Overlay 
District, only one residential building shall be erected on a lot regardless of the size or 
dimension of the lot. 
10. On a corner lot in a residential district, no fence, wall, structure, planting or 
shrubbery, or foliage more than three and one-half feet in height above the plane of 
the established grade of the street shall be erected in any part of the area that is 
included within the street lines and a line drawn diagonally across the lot connecting 
the street lines at points 20  feet from the point of intersection measured along the 
street, which would obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle approaching the 
intersection. 
 

Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-5 
b. An analysis of the site, including wetlands, slopes, soil conditions, areas within the 
100-year flood zone, vegetative areas, and other natural features as the SPGA may 
request; and 
c. An evaluation of the open space proposed within the residential cluster development, 
with respect to the size, shape, location, natural resource value, and accessibility by 
residents of the development or residents of the town, as applicable. 
G. Required Findings for a Special Permit. No special permit shall be granted unless the 
SPGA finds that: 
1. The use complies with the site plan approval requirements of this Bylaw. 
2. The plan and application meet all requirements for submission. 
3. The proposed use will not have a detrimental impact on the neighborhood. 
4. The plan considers health and safety and is superior to a conventional plan in 
preserving open space, minimizing environmental disruption, and allowing for more 
efficient provision of services. 
11.4 Townhouse Overlay District (TOD) 
A. Use regulations 
1. All uses permitted by right or by special permit in the underlying districts are 
permitted by right or by special permit in the Townhouse Overlay District (TOD). 
2. A residential Townhouse use is allowed by special permit from the Zoning Board of 
Appeals. 
B. Applicability. The TOD may be applied to the Village Residence, Neighborhood 
Residence, Rural Residence, Neighborhood Business, and General Business Districts. 
C. Site Requirements  
1. The minimum site size for a Townhouse development shall be 200,000 square feet. 
2. The Townhouse site shall have not less than 150 feet of frontage. 
3. Buildings shall not cover more than 30 percent of the site. 
4. At least 40 percent of the site shall be maintained as green space. 
5. Green Strips 
a. A 25-foot-wide green strip shall be provided around the perimeter of the tract, except 
where curb cuts are located. 
b. Green Strips shall consist of planted or natural vegetation, including trees, shrubs, 
grasses, ground cover, and flowers. 
c. The green strip shall not be built on, paved, or parked on. 
6. Sewer and Water 
a. All sites must be served by the Town water system. 
b. All sites must be served by an existing Town sewer, an extension of an existing 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-6 
Town sewer line approved by the Select Board, or a private septic system approved 
by the Board of Health. 
c. If approved by the Sewer Commission, the developer is financially responsible for 
installing any new sewer line extension, which will be installed in accordance with 
the specifications provided by the Sewer Extension Commission and laid out to 
serve any residence it passes. 
D. Density and Design Standards 
1. Standards for Buildings. 
a. Townhouse buildings shall not exceed two and one-half stories or be more than 35 
feet in height, provided that no living quarters shall be located below the mean 
finished grade of the ground adjoining the building or above the second story. 
b. Α minimum of 6,800 square feet of land shall be required for each dwelling unit. 
The area used in the calculation shall not include any bordering vegetative wetlands 
defined by G.L. c. 131, § 40 and by 310 CMR 10.00 or any flood plain as described 
in this Bylaw. 
c. There shall be a minimum of 40 feet between two residential buildings or groups of 
townhouses on the same site. 
d. Townhouse rows shall consist of a minimum of three units and a maximum of 10 
units. 
e. Each townhouse dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide. 
f. No open parking or driveway shall be closer than 15 feet to a wall containing 
windows or habitable rooms. 
g. Townhouses may be maintained as rental units or sold as condominiums. 
Townhouse units may not be sold as row houses with their own individual sites. This 
shall not restrict the allocation of outdoor space adjacent to individual dwelling units 
for the exclusive use of the occupants of specific dwelling units. 
h. Garages and a community building for meetings and social activities of the residents 
shall be permitted but shall not exceed 2,000 square feet of gross floor area and shall 
comply with all green strip and setback requirements of this Bylaw. 
2. Swimming pools or any other structure, other than a dwelling, garages, community 
building, and all accessory structures that are part of a townhouse development shall 
comply with the green strip, setback, and parking requirements of this Bylaw. 
3. Yards 
a. On each site there shall be provided a minimum setback of 35 feet from the front 
property line. 
b. The side and rear setbacks shall be 50 feet, except the side setback may be reduced 
to 25 feet if the entire area within the setback is retained in its natural, wooded state 
or landscaped along the perimeter of the side lot line and may include easements 
(paved or otherwise) dedicated for public recreational purposes. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-7 
c. A landscape buffer strip shall be provided to protect adjoining properties from the 
effects of noise, lights, air, or visual impact. 
4. Density Incentive. In addition to the density allowed under this Section 11.4, density 
may be increased by 20 percent if at least half of all additional units created are 
Affordable Housing as defined in Section 2 of this Bylaw. (For example: a 
development of 10 dwelling units by right or special permit may be increased to 12 if 
one of the additional two units is affordable. In cases where 10 percent affordable is 
required, the applicant would need to provide two affordable units and 10 market 
units). 
5. Off-Street Parking 
a. There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
b. A minimum of 25 percent of the dwelling units shall have garages. 
c. The parking space within garages shall count towards the two parking spaces per 
dwelling unit requirement. 
d. Driveways leading to garages shall be at least 24 feet long. 
6. Fire Lanes 
a. All buildings shall be surrounded by fire lanes. 
b. The fire lane shall remain an open space and no vehicle may be parked in the lane. 
No building, structure, fence, stair, covered or uncovered porch, cornice, eaves, or 
other building projection may be in or erected in the fire lane without permission 
from the Fire Chief, except that buildings may be interconnected by corridors or 
walkways, if provision is made for access by fire apparatus to all outside walls. 
c. The fire lane space shall be vacant between a building and a line parallel to and 15 
feet equidistant from a building. 
7. Access Roads. All access roads shall be built according to the Department of Public 
Works' design specifications. 
E. Affordable Housing Component 
1. A minimum of 15 percent of the units created under these provisions shall be 
Affordable Housing as defined in Section 2 of this Bylaw. The Billerica Housing 
Authority is exempt from this requirement because the units under its control are 
categorically affordable. 
2. Alternatively, the Planning Board may require an applicant to contribute a fee per unit 
to the Town to be used for the development of affordable housing in lieu of or in 
conjunction with constructing and offering affordable units within the locus of the 
proposed development. The fee per unit shall be based upon the calculation of the fair 
market price of the unit minus the construction cost of the unit or the construction 
cost, whichever is greater. Payment of the fee-in-lieu may be made in one-third 
installments over the projected build-out of the development with the final payment to 
be made before the last unit is sold. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-8 
F. Required Findings for a Special Permit. No special permit shall be granted unless the 
SPGA finds that: 
1. The use complies with the site plan approval requirements of this Bylaw. 
2. The requested use:  
a. Is desirable to the public convenience or welfare. 
b. Provides for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement 
within the site, and in relation to adjacent streets, property, and improvements. 
c. Will not create or add to the undue traffic congestion or unduly impair pedestrian 
safety. 
d. Will not overload any public water, drainage, or sewer system or any other 
municipal system to such an extent that the requested use or any developed use in 
the immediate area or in any other area of the Town will be unduly subjected to 
hazards affecting health, safety, or the general welfare. 
e. Will not impair the integrity or character of the district or adjoining districts, nor be 
detrimental to the public health, convenience, or welfare. 
f. Will not, by its addition to a neighborhood, cause an excess of that particular use that 
could be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood in which it is proposed to 
be constructed. 
3. The design and architectural treatment of the use are not incongruous with or 
inappropriate for the character of the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be 
constructed. 
4. There is an adequate landscape buffer strip provided to protect adjoining properties 
from the effects of noise, lights, air, or visual impact. 
5. No building or access facilities shall be placed on any portion of the land determined 
by the Board of Health to be unsuitable for the proposed construction. 
 
11.5 Elderly Housing Overlay District 
A. Use regulations 
1. All uses permitted by right or by special permit in the underlying districts are 
permitted by right or by special permit in the Elderly Housing Overlay District. 
2. Accessory residential uses are permitted by right 
3. A special permit may be granted for Elderly Housing, which would provide people 
over 55 years of age with the opportunity to live in a development designed 
specifically for their needs, equipped with the appropriate amenities, and located 
within reasonable proximity to shopping and services. 
B. Applicability. The Elderly Housing Overlay District may be applied to the Village 
Residence, Neighborhood Residence, Rural Residence, Neighborhood Business, and 
General Business Districts. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-9 
C. Site Requirements  
1. The site shall have not less than five contiguous acres of land and not less than 150 
feet of frontage. 
2. Green Strips 
a. A 25-foot-wide green strip shall be provided around the perimeter of the tract, except 
where curb cuts are located. 
b. Green strips shall consist of planted or natural vegetation, including trees, shrubs, 
grasses, ground cover, and flowers. 
c. The green strip shall not be built on, paved, or parked on. 
3. Minimum Site Setbacks. 
a. On each site, the minimum setback shall be 35 feet from the front lot line, 30 feet 
from each of the side lot lines, and 30 feet from the rear lot lines.  
b. If an Elderly Housing Overlay District development abuts a single-family district, 
the side and rear setbacks shall be increased to 85 feet, of which at least 25 feet shall 
be retained in its natural wooded state or landscaped along the perimeter of the site 
abutting the single-family district. In all cases, a landscaped green strip shall be 
provided to protect adjoining properties from the effects of noise, lights, air, or 
visual impact. There shall be no structures, retaining walls, covered or uncovered 
porches, steps, or paving within the buffer zone. 
4. Buildings shall not cover more than 30 percent of the site. 
5. At least 40 percent of the site shall be maintained as green space. 
6. Sewer and Water 
a. All sites must be served by the Town water systems. 
b. All sites must be served by an existing Town sewer, an extension of an existing 
Town sewer line approved by the Board of Selectmen, or a private septic system 
approved by the Board of Health. 
c. If approved by the Sewer Commission, the developer is responsible for the 
installation of any new sewer line extension, which will be laid out to serve any 
residence it passes. The extension will be installed in accordance with the 
specifications provided by the Sewer Extension Commission. 
D. Density and Design Standards 
1. Standards for Buildings. 
a. Buildings and structures shall not exceed two and one-half stories or be more than 35 
feet in height, provided that no living quarters shall be located below the mean 
finished grade of the ground adjoining the building or above the second story. 
b. A minimum of 6,800 square feet of land shall be required for each dwelling unit. 
The area used in the calculation shall not include any bordering vegetative wetlands 
defined by G.L. c. 131, § 40 and by 310 CMR 10.00 or any flood plain as described 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-10 
in this Bylaw. 
c. Each dwelling unit shall have no more than two bedrooms and all exterior and 
interior doorways shall be appropriately wide for wheelchair access, following the 
applicable codes and guidelines. 
d. There shall be a minimum distance of 40 feet between two residential buildings or 
groups of buildings on the same site. 
2. Swimming pools or any other structure, other than a dwelling, garages, community 
building, and all accessory structures that are part of an elderly housing development 
shall comply with the green strip, setback, and parking requirements this Bylaw. 
3. Yards 
a. On each site there shall be provided a minimum setback of 35 feet from the front 
property line. 
b. The side and rear setbacks shall be 50 feet, except the side setback may be reduced 
to or 25 feet, if the entire area within the setback is retained in its natural, wooded 
state or landscaped along the perimeter of the side lot line, and may include 
easements (paved or otherwise) dedicated for public recreational purposes.  
c. A landscape green strip shall be provided to protect adjoining properties from the 
effects of noise, lights, air, or visual impact. 
4. Density Incentive. In addition to the density allowed under this Section 11.5, density 
may be increased by 20 percent if at least half of all additional units created are 
Affordable Housing as defined in Section 2 of this Bylaw. (For example: a 
development of 10 dwelling units by right or special permit may be increased to 12 if 
one of the additional two units is affordable. In cases where 10 percent affordable is 
required, the applicant would need to provide two affordable units and 10 market 
units). 
5. Off-Street Parking 
a. There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
b. A minimum of 25 percent of the dwelling units shall have garages. 
c. The parking space within a garage shall count toward the two parking spaces per 
dwelling unit requirement. 
d. No open parking or driveway shall be closer than 15 feet to a wall containing 
windows or habitable rooms. 
6. Fire Lanes 
a. All buildings shall be surrounded by fire lanes. 
b. The fire lane shall remain an open space and no vehicle may be parked in the lane 
and no building, structure, fence, stair, covered or uncovered porch, cornice, eaves, 
or other building projection may be located in or erected in the fire lane without 
permission from the Fire Chief, except that buildings may be interconnected by 
corridors or walkways, if provision is made for access by fire apparatus to all outside 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-11 
walls. 
7. All-access roads shall be built in accordance with the design specifications of the 
Town’s Department of Public Works. 
E. Deed Restrictions. Deed restrictions, requiring that all residents, except for spouses or 
caregivers, have reached the age of 55, shall be placed on the entire site and referenced in 
all leases as applicable. Town Counsel shall review these restrictions for acceptance. The 
applicant shall be responsible for the cost of the review. 
F. Affordable Housing Component 
1. At least 15 percent of the units created under these provisions shall be Affordable 
Housing as defined in Section 2 of this Bylaw. The Billerica Housing Authority is 
exempt from this requirement because the units under its control are categorically 
affordable. 
2. Alternatively, the Planning Board may require an applicant to contribute a fee per unit 
to the Town to be used for the development of affordable housing in lieu of or in 
conjunction with constructing and offering affordable units within the locus of the 
proposed development. The fee per unit shall be based upon the calculation of the fair 
market price of the unit minus the construction cost of the unit or the construction 
cost, whichever is greater. Payment of the fee-in-lieu may be made in one-third 
installments over the projected build-out of the development with the final payment to 
be made before the last unit is sold. 
G. Required Findings for a Special Permit. No special permit shall be granted unless the 
SPGA finds that: 
1. The use complies with the site plan approval requirements of this Bylaw. 
2. The requested use:  
a. Is desirable to the public convenience or welfare. 
b. Provides for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement 
within the site, and in relation to adjacent streets, property, and improvements. 
c. Will not create or add to the undue traffic congestion or unduly impair pedestrian 
safety. 
d. Will not overload any public water, drainage, or sewer system or any other 
municipal system to such an extent that the requested use or any developed use in 
the immediate area or in any other area of the Town will be unduly subjected to 
hazards affecting health, safety, or the general welfare. 
e. Will not impair the integrity or character of the district or adjoining districts, nor be 
detrimental to the public health, convenience, or welfare. 
f. Will not, by its addition to a neighborhood, cause an excess of that particular use that 
could be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood in which it is proposed to 
be constructed. 
3. The design and architectural treatment of the use are not incongruous with or 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-12 
inappropriate for the character of the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be 
constructed. 
4. There is an adequate landscape buffer strip provided to protect adjoining properties 
from the effects of noise, lights, air, or visual impact. 
5. No building or access facilities shall be placed on any portion of the land determined 
by the Board of Health to be unsuitable for the proposed construction. 
11.6 Self-Service Overlay District 
A. Applicability. The Self-Service Overlay District may be applied to the Industrial District. 
B. Use Regulations 
1. All uses permitted by right or by special permit in the underlying districts are 
permitted by right or by special permit in the Self-Service Overlay District. 
2. A special permit may be granted for a self-storage service facility. 
C. Dimensional Regulations 
1. Area, Height, and Other Dimensional Requirements 
a. The minimum lot area for a self-service storage facility shall be 10 acres unless a 
preexisting building is to be converted to a climate-controlled facility. 
b. The minimum lot area for a climate-controlled self-storage facility within a pre-
existing building shall be 5 acres. 
c. Unless a pre-existing building is to be converted to a climate-controlled self-storage 
facility, buildings shall not exceed one story or 13 feet in height. 
d. Any preexisting building to be converted to a climate-controlled self-storage facility 
shall meet all other lot dimensional requirements in existence when the building was 
constructed. 
e. All other lot dimensional requirements for a self-service storage facility contained 
within a preexisting building shall be the same as those required in the underlying 
Industrial District. 
2. Green Strips and Green Space. If a preexisting building is to be converted to a 
climate-controlled self-storage facility, all green strip and green space requirements in 
existence when the preexisting building was constructed shall apply. For all other 
self-storage facilities to be constructed, the following green strip and green space 
requirements shall apply. 
a. A minimum 20-foot green strip shall be provided and maintained along a minimum 
of 70 percent of the perimeter of each lot, excluding curb cuts.  
b. Green strips shall consist of natural or planted vegetation. 
c. A green space shall be set aside on each side that is the greater of 25 percent of the 
site’s area or five acres. This area cannot be used for driveways, roadways, parking 
areas, and paved areas for vehicular travel of any type. 
D. Parking and Loading. A pre-existing building to be converted to a climate-controlled self-
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-13 
storage facility shall be subject to the parking and loading requirements in existence 
when the building was permitted. All other self-storage facilities to be constructed shall 
be subject to the parking and loading requirements of this Bylaw with the following 
exceptions: 
1. The total number of conventional parking spaces shall be six plus one handicapped 
space. 
2. Additional parking shall be provided by parking/driving lanes adjacent to the 
buildings. These lanes shall be at least 26 feet wide when the cubicles open onto one 
side of the lane only and at least 30 feet wide when cubicles open onto both sides of 
the lane. No loading docks shall be allowed on the site. No lane shall exceed 30 feet 
in width at its throat. 
 
E. Limitations 
1. A preexisting building to be converted to a climate-controlled self-storage facility 
may be utilized for the storage of personal property and for the storage of goods, 
inventory, and merchandise of local businesses. All other self-storage facilities shall 
be limited to personal property use only. 
2. No activity other than rental of storage units and pick up and deposit of personal 
property shall be allowed on the lot except for accessory or incidental uses required in 
administration and security of the site. 
3. No outside storage shall be allowed. 
4. The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or 
hazardous chemicals shall be prohibited. 
5. The use of the unit for uses other than dead storage shall be prohibited. 
6. Servicing or repairing motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawnmowers, or similar 
equipment is prohibited. 
F. Signs. All signs on the premises shall be in conformity with the sign requirements of this 
Bylaw.
 
G. Required Findings 
1. A previously permitted building to be converted to a climate-controlled self-storage 
facility shall comply with the site plan approval and permitting requirements, if any, 
imposed when the building was constructed. 
2. For any self-service storage facilities to be constructed, the use complies with the site 
plan approval requirements of this Bylaw. 
3. The use complies with the requirements set forth in this Section 11.6. 
4. The location of the use will not be detrimental to the neighborhood in which it is 
located. 
5. The use will not generate undue traffic or create traffic congestion on the site . 
11.7 Mill Conversion and Reuse Overlay District (MCROD) 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-14 
A. Purpose and Intent. The purposes of the Mill Conversion and Reuse Overlay District 
(MCROD) are to:  
1. Facilitate and encourage the reuse of the North Billerica historic mill buildings in a 
fashion that is appropriate for the individual properties and compatible with the 
surrounding land uses;  
2. Promote diverse housing choices in the Town;  
3. Provide flexibility in meeting the Town’s housing and economic development needs;  
4. Prevent disinvestment and deterioration of historic structures; and  
5. Encourage sustainable mixed-use development, including transit-oriented 
development, in the area of the North Billerica Commuter Rail Station. 
B. Establishment of the Overlay District. The Mill Conversion and Reuse Overlay District 
(MCROD) is hereby established and shall be considered an overlay zoning district. 
Within the MCROD, all requirements of the underlying district(s) shall remain in effect 
except where these regulations supersede or provide an alternative to those requirements. 
If a property is developed consistent with the Mill Conversion and Reuse Overlay 
District, the regulations of the MCROD shall apply. Where the provisions of the Mill 
Conversion and Reuse Overlay District are silent on a zoning regulation, the requirements 
of the underlying zoning district shall apply. 
C. Applicability. The Mill Conversion and Reuse Overlay District may be applied to the 
Neighborhood Business, General Business, and Commercial or Industrial Districts. This 
requires a rezoning of land pursuant to the procedures outlined under Section 1.5 of this 
Bylaw and to G.L. c.40A, § 5.  
D. Special Permit. Uses other than those allowed within the underlying zone(s) require a 
special permit by the Planning Board and a Site Plan approval pursuant to Section 4.7 of 
this Bylaw. No other uses or structures shall be permitted in conjunction with a project 
except as specifically stated herein. 
E. Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA). The Planning Board shall serve as the SPGA 
pursuant to this Section 11.7.  
F. Special Permit Procedures. 
1. Application. All applications for a Mill Conversion and Reuse Project shall be 
submitted to the Planning Board on the form required by the Board in accordance 
with its regulations. Each application shall be accompanied, if applicable, by a 
definitive plan of land pursuant to the provisions of G.L. 41, § §81 O and 81 T, and 
the Regulations of the Planning Board, along with a filing fee determined in 
accordance with the Board’s regulations. Additionally, the applicant shall submit the 
following: 
a. Plans 
(i) A site plan and all supporting documents, as set forth in Section 4.7 of this 
Bylaw. 
(ii) A plan at a scale of 1” = 40’ showing the topography of the site at a minimum 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-15 
of two-foot contour intervals. The plan must use the Massachusetts State 
Plane (NAD 83) coordinate system and include vegetation and special features 
including wetlands, perennial streams and ponds, waterways, waterfalls, 
canals and dams, trees of more that 8 inches caliper, rock outcroppings, slopes 
in excess of fifteen percent (15%), existing and proposed trails and walkways, 
vistas, structures of historical importance, biological or wildlife habitats, and 
proposed and existing conservation or recreation easements. 
(iii)A plan illustrating preliminary landscaping and architectural design, showing 
types, locations and layout of buildings and elevations as well as the general 
height, bulk and appearance of structures. Perspectives may be required at 
Board’s discretion. 
(iv) A floor plan to scale for each floor of each building indicating where 
applicable, the number of units by type, the number of bedrooms per dwelling 
unit, the proposed use(s) of floor space and the location of affordable dwelling 
units. 
(v) A plan for the care, custody and control of all dams, canals and water rights 
located on the site or owned or controlled by the applicant. 
2. Narrative Reports 
a. A report regarding the proposed development schedule showing the beginning of 
construction and relevant or significant stages and the estimated date of completion 
and occupancy. 
b. A development impact statement prepared by a qualified professional detailing the 
impact of the development at all phases including construction on the Town’s 
capacity to furnish services, including, but not limited to, roads and levels of service, 
police, fire, emergency service, schools, air quality, noise, light pollution and other 
environmental concerns. 
c. Information pertaining to any organization or entity the applicant proposes to form 
where the development is to be a condominium or other ownership organization, 
including forms and plans used to organize and manage the same. 
d. Copies of all proposed covenants, easements, and other restrictions that the applicant 
proposes to grant to the Town, Conservation Commission, utility company, the 
Middlesex Canal Commission, or others, including any condominium or ownership 
organization and the owners thereof, for review by Town Counsel and approval by 
the Planning Board. 
e. A table showing the total number of dwelling units and the number of affordable 
units by type and size on each floor of each building. 
f. If applicable, copies of the proposed regulatory agreement for each affordable 
housing unit, and where appropriate, the proposed deed rider for each affordable 
ownership unit. 
g. A narrative analysis prepared by a preservation consultant, including all historical 
information to be submitted to the Billerica Historic Districts Commission and the 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-16 
Planning Board. The narrative must include an architectural history of all structures 
on the site, including period, style, construction details and any association with any 
particular architect or builder. The narrative must also list any association with one 
or more historic persons or events and any cultural, political, or economic history of 
the site to the town, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or the United States of 
America. 
h. Evidence the proposed project is consistent with applicable standards of the National 
Park Service, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Commonwealth, 
Massachusetts Historical Commission, and the Billerica Historic Districts 
Commission. 
i. Any other information that the Planning Board may reasonably require in a form 
acceptable to it to assist in determining whether the applicant’s proposed 
development plan meets the objectives of this Section. 
3. Fees. The following fees apply: 
a. Technical review fee. The applicant shall pay a technical review fee pursuant to G.L. 
c. 44, § 53G and the rules of the Planning Board. 
b. Administrative Fee. The applicant shall pay an administrative fee pursuant to the 
rules of the Planning Board. 
4. Waiver. The Planning Board may waive the submission of technical information or 
documents otherwise required hereunder where the applicant demonstrates that, due 
to the simplicity of the proposal, the information is not necessary for, or applicable to, 
the Planning Board’s decision pursuant to this section. All waivers shall be approved 
by the Planning Board prior to application submittal. 
5. Review by Other Boards.  
a. Whenever an application for a special permit for a project in the MCROD is filed 
with the Planning Board, the applicant shall also file, within five working days of the 
filing of the complete application, copies of the application, accompanying site plan, 
and other documentation to: the Town Manager, Board of Selectmen, Board of 
Health, Conservation Commission, Inspector of Buildings, Superintendent of Public 
Works, Billerica Historic Districts Commission, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and the 
Town Engineer for their consideration, review, and report. The applicant shall 
furnish the copies necessary to fulfill this requirement.  
b. Reports from other boards and officials shall be submitted to the Planning Board by 
the date of the public hearing, but in any case, within 35 days of receipt of the 
reviewing party of all the required materials. Failure of the reviewing parties to make 
recommendations following receipt of required materials shall be deemed a lack of 
opposition thereto.  
c. If the public hearing by the Planning Board is held prior to the expiration of the 35-
day period, the Planning Board shall continue the public hearing to permit the formal 
submission of reports and recommendations within that 35-day period. The Decision 
and Findings of the Planning Board shall contain a written explanation of any 
departures from the recommendations of any reviewing party. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-43 
These parking requirements are applicable to development of uses identified in the 
MCMOD. 
1. Number of parking spaces. The following minimum numbers of off-street parking 
spaces shall be permitted by use, either in surface parking or within garages or other 
structures: 
Use Minimum spaces per dwelling unit by Subzone  
 Subdistrict A: 
Outer Mills 
Subdistrict B: 
Inner Mills 
Subdistrict C: 
Federal 
Subdistrict 
D: Kenmar 
Multi-family 
studio and one 
(1) bedroom 
units 
1.5/unit 1.5/unit 1.5/unit 1.5/unit 
Multi-family 
two (2) or more 
bedrooms 
2/unit 1.5/unit 2/unit 2/unit 
Mixed-Use 
(Non- 
residential)/ 
Commercial 
Component 
n/a Sum of uses 
computed 
separately. (See 
SECTION 10.1 
PARKING 
AND 
LOADING 
REGULATIONS
.) 
Sum of uses 
computed 
separately. (See 
SECTION 10.1 
PARKING 
AND 
LOADING 
REGULATIONS
.) 
n/a 
 
2. Number of bicycle parking spaces. The following minimum numbers of covered 
bicycle storage spaces shall be provided by use: 
Use Minimum spaces per dwelling unit by Subzone  
 Subdistrict A: 
Outer Mills 
Subdistrict B: 
Inner Mills 
Subdistrict C: 
Federal 
Subdistrict D: 
Kenmar 
Multi-family 1 1 1 1 
Mixed-Use (Non- 
residential)/ 
Commercial 
Component 
n/a 1 per every 20 
parking spaces 
1 per every 20 
parking spaces 
n/a 
 
3. Bicycle storage. For a multi-family development of six (6) units or more, or a mixed-
use development of 25,000 square feet or more, covered parking bicycle parking 
spaces shall be integrated into the structure of the building(s). 
4. Shared Parking within a Mixed-Use Development. Parking requirements for a mix of 
uses on a single site may be adjusted through the Site Plan Review process, if the 
applicant can demonstrate that shared spaces will meet parking demands by using 
accepted methodologies. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-44 
5. Waiver of Parking Requirements for Historic Buildings. The Planning Board may 
allow for parking requirement waivers of this section for the adaptive reuse of 
buildings listed on the National or State Registers of Historic Places, or eligible for 
such listing through the Site Plan Review process. The Planning Board may also 
approve offsite off-street parking agreements to locate the required parking on an 
adjacent parcel or parcel located within 300 feet of the development. 
6. Number of electric vehicle (EV) charging stations. For all uses within the MCMOD, 
electric charging stations are required with one EV space required for every 20 
parking spaces, rounded up to the next highest number of EV stations. 
 
G. General Development Standards 
1. The Development standards in this section are applicable to all multi-family 
development and any mixed-use development within the MCMOD. These standards 
are components of the Site Plan Review process in Section 11.11.I. Site Plan Review. 
2. Site Design. 
a. Connections. Sidewalks shall provide direct connections among building 
entrances, the public sidewalk, bicycle storage, and parking. 
b. Vehicular access. Where feasible, curb cuts shall be minimized, and shared 
driveways encouraged. 
c. Open Space. Acceptable activities within the minimum required Open Space 
include natural areas (including wetlands and surface waters), wildlife and native 
plant habitat, landscape plantings, agricultural activities, low impact design 
stormwater management, non-motorized trails, and other low-impact activities. 
Open Space shall not contain habitable structures. 
d. Location of Parking. Parking, either surface or structured, is not allowed between 
a building and the front yard lot line. On a corner lot, parking is not allowed 
between the building and the front and side yard lot lines. 
e. Screening for Parking. Surface parking adjacent to a public sidewalk shall be 
screened by a landscaped buffer of sufficient width to allow the healthy 
establishment of trees, shrubs, and perennials, but no less than six (6) feet. The 
buffer may include a fence or wall of no more than three feet in height unless 
there is a significant grade change between the parking and the sidewalk. 
f. Parking Materials. The parking surface may be concrete, asphalt, bricks, or 
pavers, including pervious materials but not including grass or soil not contained 
within a paver or other structure. 
g. Plantings. Plantings shall include species that are native or adapted to the region. 
Plants on the Massachusetts Prohibited Plant List, as may be amended, shall be 
prohibited. 
h. Lighting. Light levels shall meet or exceed the minimum design guidelines 
defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) and 
shall provide illumination necessary for safety and convenience while preventing 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-45 
glare and overspill onto adjoining properties and reducing the amount of skyglow. 
i. Mechanicals. Mechanical equipment at ground level shall be screened by a 
combination of fencing and plantings. Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be 
screened if visible from a public right-of-way. 
j. Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be screened by a combination of fencing and 
plantings. Where possible, dumpsters or other trash and recycling collection 
points shall be located within the building. 
k. Stormwater management. Strategies that demonstrate compliance of the 
construction activities and the proposed project with the most current versions of 
the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater 
Management Standards, the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, Massachusetts 
Erosion Sediment and Control Guidelines, and, if applicable, additional 
requirements under the Town of Billerica MS4 Permit for projects that disturb 
more than one acre and discharge to the Town’s municipal stormwater system, 
and an Operations and Management Plan for both the construction activities and 
ongoing post-construction maintenance and reporting requirements. 
3. Buildings: General. 
a. Position relative to principal street. The primary building shall have its principal 
façade and entrance facing the principal street. On lots with multiple buildings, 
the building closest to the principal street is considered the primary building for 
this section. See also Section G.7. Buildings: Corner Lots. 
b. Entries. Where feasible, entries shall be clearly defined and linked to a paved 
pedestrian network that includes the public sidewalk. 
4. Buildings: Multiple buildings on a lot. 
a. For a mixed-use development, uses may be mixed within the buildings 
or in separate buildings. 
b. Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized so as to reduce the 
amount of impervious surface. Where possible, parking and loading areas 
shall be connected to minimize curb cuts onto public rights-of- way. 
c. A paved pedestrian network shall connect parking to the entries to all 
buildings and the buildings to each other. 
d. All building façade(s) shall be treated with the same care and attention in 
terms of entries, fenestration, and materials. 
e. The building(s) adjacent to the public street shall have a pedestrian entry 
facing the public street 
5. Buildings: Mixed-use development. 
a. In a mixed-use building, access to and egress from the residential component shall 
be clearly differentiated from access to other uses. Such differentiation may occur 
by using separate entrances or egresses from the building or within a lobby space 
shared among different uses. 
b. Paved pedestrian access from the residential component shall be provided to 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-46 
residential parking and amenities and to the public sidewalk, as applicable. 
c. Materials for non-residential uses shall be stored inside or under cover and shall 
not be accessible to residents of the development. 
d. Parking and circulation on the site shall be organized so as to reduce the amount 
of impervious surface. Where possible, parking and loading areas shall be 
connected to minimize curb cuts onto public rights-of- way  
6. Buildings: Shared Outdoor Space. Multi-family housing and mixed-use development 
shall have common outdoor space that all residents can access. Such space may be 
located in any combination of ground floor, courtyard, rooftop, or terrace. All outdoor 
space shall count towards the project’s minimum Open Space requirement. 
7. Buildings: Corner Lots. A building on a corner lot shall indicate a primary entrance 
either along one of the street-facing façades or on the primary corner as an entrance 
serving both streets. 
a. Such entries shall be connected by a paved surface to the public sidewalk, if 
applicable. 
b. All façades visible from a public right-of-way shall be treated with the same care 
and attention in terms of entries, fenestration, and materials. 
c. Fire exits serving more than one story shall not be located on either of the street-
facing façades 
8. Buildings: Infill Lots. If the adjacent buildings are set back at a distance that exceeds 
the minimum front yard requirements, infill buildings shall meet the requirements of 
Section 11.11.E. Density and Dimensional Standards. Otherwise, infill buildings may 
match the setback line of either adjacent building, or an average of the setback of the 
two buildings to provide consistency along the street 
9. Buildings: Principal Façade and Parking. Parking shall be subordinate in design and 
location to the principal building façade. 
a. Surface parking. Surface parking shall be located to the rear or side of the 
principal building. Parking shall not be located in the setback between the 
building and any lot line adjacent to the public right-of- way. 
b. Integrated garages. The principal pedestrian entry into the building shall be more 
prominent in design and placement than the vehicular entry into the garage. 
c. Parking structures. Building(s) dedicated to structured parking on the same lot as 
one or more multi-family buildings or mixed-use development shall be 
subordinate in design and placement to the multi-family or mixed-use building(s) 
on the lot. 
10. Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant and subject to compliance with the 
Compliance Guidelines, the Site Plan Review Authority may waive requirements of 
this Section 11.11.G. General Development Standards, in the interests of design 
flexibility and overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of such 
variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the MCMOD. 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-47 
 
H. Affordability Requirements 
1. Purpose. 
a. Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by encouraging a diversity 
of housing opportunities for people of different income levels; 
b. Provide for a full range of housing choices for households of all 
incomes, ages, and sizes; 
c. Increase the production of affordable housing units to meet existing and 
anticipated housing needs; and  
d. Work to overcome economic segregation allowing Billerica to be a 
community of opportunity in which low and moderate-income 
households have the opportunity to advance economically. 
2. Applicability. This requirement is applicable to all multi-family and mixed-use 
developments with six (6) or more dwelling units, whether new construction, 
substantial rehabilitation, expansion, reconstruction, or residential conversion 
(Applicable Projects). No project may be divided or phased to avoid the requirements 
of this section. 
3. Provision of Affordable Housing. In Applicable Projects, not fewer than 10% of 
housing units constructed shall be Affordable Housing Units as defined by the 
EOHLC Subsidized Housing Inventory (SHI). For the purposes of calculating the 
number of units of Affordable Housing required within a development project, any 
fractional unit of 0.5 or greater shall be deemed to constitute a whole unit and any 
fractional unit of 0.4 or less shall require no contribution to satisfy the fractional 
share. The Affordable Units shall be available to households earning income up to 
eighty percent (80%) of the AMI 
4. Development Standards. Affordable Units shall be: 
a. Integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, 
appearance, construction, and quality of exterior and interior materials with the 
other units and/or lots; 
b. Dispersed throughout the development; 
c. Located such that the units have equal access to shared amenities, including light, 
air, and utilities (including any bicycle storage and/or Electric Vehicle charging 
stations) within the development; 
d. Located such that the units have equal avoidance of any potential nuisances as 
market-rate units within the development; 
e. Distributed proportionately among unit sizes; and 
f. Distributed proportionately across each phase of a phased development. 
g. Occupancy permits shall only be issued for market-rate units prior to the end of 
construction of the entire development if occupancy permits for Affordable Units 
are issued simultaneously on a pro rata basis 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-48 
5. Administration. 
a. The Planning Director shall be responsible for administering and enforcing the 
requirements in this section. 
 
I. Site Plan Review 
1. Administration. The provisions of this Section 11.11.I shall be administered by the 
Site Plan Review Authority, except as otherwise provided herein  
2. Applicability. Site Plan Review is required for a project that proposes six (6) dwelling 
units or more. An application for Site Plan Review shall be reviewed by the 
Permitting Authority for consistency with the purpose and intent of Sections 11.11.D 
through H. 
a. In cases where the Site Plan Review Authority is also considering a Special 
Permit, they should determine the Special Permit first and then undertake a final 
Site Plan Review. 
b. This section supersedes the Site Plan review process described in Section 4.7 of 
the Zoning Bylaw. 
3. Submission Requirements. As part of any application for Site Plan Review for a 
project within the MCMOD, the Applicant must submit the following documents to 
the Municipality: 
a. Application and fee for Site Plan Review. 
b. Site plans that show the position of the building on the site, points of vehicular 
access to and from the site and vehicular circulation on the site, stormwater 
management, utilities, and landscape treatments, including any screening of 
adjacent properties, and other information commonly required by Municipality for 
Site Plan Review. 
c. Elevations of the building(s) showing the architectural design of the building. 
d. All site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, and/or 
a civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All landscape 
plans shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect registered in the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All building elevations shall be prepared by a 
certified architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. All plans 
shall be signed and stamped, and drawings prepared at a scale of one inch equals 
forty feet (1"=40') or larger, or at a scale as approved in advance by the Permitting 
Authority. 
e. Narrative of compliance with the applicable design standards of this Section 
11.11. 
4. Timeline. Site Plan Review should be commenced no later than 30 days after the 
submission of a complete application and should be completed expeditiously. The site 
plan review authority may, when appropriate, seek the input of other municipal 
boards or officials. In general, site plan review should be completed no more than six 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 11-49 
(6) months after the submission of the application 
5. Site Plan Approval. Site Plan approval for uses listed in Section 11.11.D Permitted 
Uses shall be granted upon determination by the Site Plan Review Authority that the 
following findings have been satisfied. The Site Plan Review Authority may impose 
reasonable conditions, at the expense of the applicant, to ensure that these findings 
have been satisfied. 
a. The Applicant has submitted the required fees and information as set forth in 
Municipality’s requirements for a Building Permit and Site Plan Review; and 
b. The project as described in the application meets the development standards set 
forth in Section 11.11.G. General Development Standards.] 
6. Project Phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Site Plan Review submission, that a 
project be developed in phases subject to the approval of the Site Plan Review 
Authority, provided that the submission shows the full buildout of the project and all 
associated impacts as of the completion of the final phase. However, no project may 
be phased solely to avoid the provisions of Section 11.11.H. Affordability 
Requirements. 
J. Severability 
If any provision of this Section 11.11 is found to be invalid by a court of 
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of Section 11.11 shall not be affected but 
shall remain in full force. The invalidity of any provision of this Section 11.11 
shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Town of Billerica’s Zoning
. 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 12-1 
Section 12. Special Districts 
 
12.1 Adult Entertainment District 
A. The following uses shall be permitted in the Adult Entertainment District: 
1. Agricultural, educational, or religious uses exempt under G.L. c. 40A, § 3. 
2. State, county, and municipal uses  
3. Business uses: 
a. Bank 
b. Loan agency 
c. Offices 
d. Pet shop 
e. Personal services 
f. Tradesperson’s shop 
g. Veterinarian 
h. Adult entertainment establishment 
i. Christmas tree sales 
j. Garaging or parking of up to two light commercial vehicles 
k. Garaging or parking of up to two heavy commercial vehicles 
l. Retail store 
4. Temporary construction trailer 
5. Recreational uses 
a. Antique shows 
b. Bowling alley 
c. Conservation 
d. Driving range 
e. Fairs and bazaars  
f. Non-municipal athletics 
g. Other recreational events 
h. Swimming pool 
6. Residential uses: 
a. Room rental (up to five rooms) 
b. Single-family dwelling 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 12-2 
c. Storage of one vehicle or trailer 
d. Temporary use of a manufactured home during reconstruction of a dwelling 
7. Utility uses 
a. Above-ground municipal utilities 
b. Earth migration of less than 500 cubic yards for construction or repair of roads, 
utilities, public works, and infrastructure; installation or repair of underground 
sewage disposal systems; or excavation for foundations. 
c. Underground utilities. 
B. The following uses are allowed only by special permit from the Board of Appeals in the 
Adult Entertainment District: 
1. Business uses: 
a. Accessory uses to scientific research or development 
b. Dog kennel for three to 15 dogs 
c. Funeral home 
d. Research facility 
e. Auto parking 
f. Auto repair 
g. Auto sales and service 
h. Auto washing 
i. Drive-up or drive-through restaurant 
j. Fully automated business 
k. Garden shop 
l. Hotel or motel 
m. Open air sales 
n. Restaurant 
2. Light manufacturing 
3. Philanthropic uses 
a. Club 
b. Lodge 
c. Other philanthropic 
4. Recreational uses: 
a. Golf course 
b. Outdoor recreation 
Proposed Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
 12-3 
c. Riding stable 
5. Residential uses: 
a. Assisted living residence 
b. Nursing home 
c. Storage of more than one vehicle or trailer 
6. Cemetery 
7. Utility uses: 
a. Above-ground utilities, non-municipal 
b. Earth migration more than 500 cubic yards 
C. The following uses are allowed only by special permit from the Planning Board in the 
Adult Entertainment District: 
a. Solar Energy Conversion Systems (SECS), non-freestanding 
b. Solar Energy Conversion Systems (SECS), freestanding 
c. Wireless communications facility 
D. The following uses are allowed only by special permit with site plan approval from the 
Planning Board in the Adult Entertainment District: 
a. Solar Energy Conversion Systems (SECS), non-freestanding 
b. Solar Energy Conversion Systems (SECS), freestanding 
c. Wireless communications facility 
E. Dimensional Requirements 
1. The minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet. 
2. The minimum lot frontage shall be 125 feet. 
3. Not more than 25 percent of the total area of a lot shall be covered by buildings and 
structures. 
4. Building height and any other provisions that apply in the General Business Districts 
shall apply to lots in the Adult Entertainment District. 
 
Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
Y=permitted as of right; SZ = allowed by special permit, Board of Appeals; SP=allowed by special permit from the Planning 
Board; SA=allowed by special permit with site plan approval from the Planning Board; N=prohibited.  
1 
APPENDIX A  
Table of Use Regulations (Section 6.3) 
 
 VR NR RR MF NB GB C I Ref. 
CONSERV ATION, RECREATION, AGRICULTURE          
Conservation and Agriculture 
        
 
Agriculture Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Conservation Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Facility for Sale of Produce, Wine, and Dairy Products Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Public or Non-Profit Recreation           
Driving Range Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Fairs and Bazaars  Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Non-Municipal Athletics Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Other Recreational Events Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Outdoor Recreation  SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ 7.1(A) 
          
PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL          
Municipal Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Non-Profit Educational Use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Cemetery SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ 7.2(A) 
Nursing Home  SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZY SZY 7.2(B) 
Adult Day Care N N N N N Y Y Y  
NON-PROFIT PHILANTHROPIC USES          
Club  SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ NY 7.3(A) 
Lodge SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ NY 7.3(A) 
Other Philanthropic SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ NY 7.3(A) 
          
RESIDENTIAL USES          
Affordable Housing on an Undersized Lot SZ SZ SZ SZ Y N N N 7.4(A) 
Assisted Living Residence SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ 7.4(B) 
Dwelling, Multifamily N N N SA N N N N 6.4 
Dwelling, Single-Family Y Y Y Y Y Y N N  
Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
Y=permitted as of right; SZ = allowed by special permit, Board of Appeals; SP=allowed by special permit from the Planning 
Board; SA=allowed by special permit with site plan approval from the Planning Board; N=prohibited.  
2 
 VR NR RR MF NB GB C I Ref. 
Dwelling, Two-Family N N N SZ N N N N 7.4(B) 
          
BUSINESS & COMMERCIAL USES          
Retail Sales           
Antique Shows N N N N Y Y Y Y  
Christmas Tree Sales  N N N N N Y NY NY  
Garden Shop N N N N N SZ NY NY 7.5(A) 
Greenhouse (Non-Agricultural) SZ SZ SZ N N N Y Y 7/.5(B) 
Open Air Sales N N N N N SZ Y NY 7.5(C) 
Pet Shop N N N N N Y Y NY  
Retail Store N N N N Y Y NY SZY 7.5(D) 
Supermarket N N N N N SA NY NY 7.5(E) 
Services          
Dog Kennel N N N N N SZ NSZ SZ 7.6)(A) 
Dog Daycare N N N N N SZ NSZ SZ 7.6(B) 
Dog Training N N N N N SZ NSZ SZ 7.6(B) 
For-Profit Educational Use  Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Funeral Home N N N N SZ SZ N N 7.6(C) 
Personal Services N N N N Y Y Y Y  
Repair Shop N N N N Y Y NSZ SZ 7.6(D) 
Veterinarian N N N N N Y NY NY  
Accommodations and Food Services           
Drive-Up/Through Restaurant N N N N N SZ SZ NSZ 7.7(A) 
Fast-Order Food Establishment  N N N N SZ SZ SZ SZ 7.7(B) 
Motel or Hotel N N N N SZ SZ N SZ 7.7(C) 
Restaurant N N N N SZ SZ NSZ SZY 7.7(D) 
Financial, Offices          
Bank N N N N Y Y NY SZY 7.8(A) 
Loan Agency N N N N Y Y Y Y  
Offices N N N N Y Y Y Y  
Amusement, Recreation Businesses          
Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
Y=permitted as of right; SZ = allowed by special permit, Board of Appeals; SP=allowed by special permit from the Planning 
Board; SA=allowed by special permit with site plan approval from the Planning Board; N=prohibited.  
3 
 VR NR RR MF NB GB C I Ref. 
Bowling Alley N N N N Y Y Y Y  
Golf Course SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ 7.9(A) 
Indoor Amusement N N N N Y Y Y NY  
Riding Stable SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ 7.9(B) 
Swimming Pool, Non-Accessory SZ SZ SZ SZ Y Y Y Y 7.9(C) 
Unclassified; Other Business & Commercial          
Fully Automated Business  N N N N N SZ SZY SZY 7.10(A) 
Research Facility N N N N SA SA SA Y 7.10(B) 
Tradesman’s Shop N N N N Y Y Y Y  
          
Vehicle-Related Uses          
Auto sales N N N N N SZ SZ SZ 7.11(B) 
Auto services N N N N N N N SZ 7.11(A) 
Auto repair N N N N N SZ SZ NSZ 7.11(A) 
Auto service N N N N N SZ SZ NSZ 7.11(A) 
Auto washing N N N N N SZ SZ NSZ 7.11(A) 
Truck body shop  N N N N N N SZ NSZ 7.11(C) 
Truck leasing N N N N N N SZ NSZ 7.11(C) 
Truck repair N N N N N N SZ NSZ 7.11(C) 
Truck sales N N N N N N SZ NSZ 7.11(C) 
Truck service N N N N N N SZ NSZ 7.11(C) 
Truck washing N N N N N N Y Y 7.11(C) 
          
INDUSTRIAL USES          
Manufacturing, Distribution          
Light Manufacturing N N N N N SZ NSZ Y 7.12(A) 
Wholesale N N N N N SZ N SZY 7.12(B) 
Utility Uses          
Above-ground utilities, non- municipal SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ 7.13(A) 
Above-ground utilities, Municipal Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Earth migration of less than 500 cubic yards for: Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
Y=permitted as of right; SZ = allowed by special permit, Board of Appeals; SP=allowed by special permit from the Planning 
Board; SA=allowed by special permit with site plan approval from the Planning Board; N=prohibited.  
4 
 VR NR RR MF NB GB C I Ref. 
Earth migration over 500 cubic yards  SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ 7.13(B) 
(SECS) Non-freestanding  Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
(SECS) Freestanding SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP 6.5 
Underground utilities Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
Wireless communications facility SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP 6.6 
Waste Disposal          
Recyclable Materials Transfer Center N N N N N N N SA  
Temporary Construction Trailer N N N Y Y Y Y Y  
Other Industrial 
        
 
Contractor’s Yard N N N N N N SP SP 7.14(A) 
          
ACCESSORY USES          
Residential Accessory Uses          
Accessory Residential Uses Y Y Y Y Y Y N N  
Home Occupation1 Y Y Y Y N N N N 7.15(A) 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Y Y Y Y Y Y N N  
In-Law Apartment SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ N N 7.15(B) 
Keeping of Horses:2  Y Y Y N N N N N  
Keeping of Hens  Y Y Y N N N N N  
Room Rental (5 Or Less) Y Y Y Y Y Y N N  
Room Rental (More Than 5) SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ N N 7.15(C) 
Storage of One V ehicle or Trailer Y Y Y Y Y Y N N  
Storage of More than One V ehicle or Trailer SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ N N 7.15(D) 
          
Nonresidential Accessory Uses          
Accessory Retail and Automotive Services N N N N N N N SZ 7.16(A) 
Accessory uses to scientific research or development N N N N SZ SZ SZY Y 7.16(B) 
 
1 Except a special permit shall be required for a Home Occupation employing one or more nonresidents of the premises.  
2 Minimum land requirement per horse: <10,000 S.F., no horses; 10,000 – 19,999 S.F., 1 horse; 20,000 – 29,999 S.F., 2 horses; and 30,000 or more S.F., 3 
horses. 
Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
Y=permitted as of right; SZ = allowed by special permit, Board of Appeals; SP=allowed by special permit from the Planning 
Board; SA=allowed by special permit with site plan approval from the Planning Board; N=prohibited.  
5 
 VR NR RR MF NB GB C I Ref. 
Accessory service and repair N N N N N N N SZ 7.16(C) 
For professional office or R&D Buildings over 50,000 net SF, 
uses that are wholly within the same building as the principal 
permitted use and occupy not less than 20% of the net square 
footage can be allowed by right. These can include retail, 
restaurant, personal services, and other amenity uses. 
N N N N N Y Y Y  
Miscellaneous Accessory Uses          
Auto parking  N N N N N SZ SZ N 7.17(A) 
Garaging or parking of one heavy commercial vehicle SZ SZ SZ SZ SZ Y Y Y 7.17(B) 
Garaging or parking of one light commercial vehicle Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 7.17(B) 
Garaging or parking of two light commercial vehicles SZ SZ SZ SZ Y Y Y Y 7.17(B) 
Garaging or parking of two or more heavy commercial vehicles N N N N N SZ Y Y 7.17(B) 
Truck parking N N N N N NSZ SZY NY 7.17(B) 
 
Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
APPENDIX B 
Table of Dimensional Regulations (Section 7.2) 
 
 Minimum Requirement Maximum Allowed 
Zoning District Lot Area 
(sq. ft.)a 
Lot 
Frontage 
(lin. ft) 
Front Yard 
(lin. ft) (6) 
Side Yard 
(lin. ft) (6) 
Rear Yard 
(lin. ft) 
 
Green Strip 
 
Green Space 
Lot 
Coverage 
 
Building Height 
Village Residence 30,000 150 35 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. lot per. (2) 
(non-residential) 
75% build. per. 
25% (2) 25% 2 ½ stories 
or 35 ft. 
(7) 
Neighborhood Residence 40,000 175 35 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. lot per. (2) 
(non-residential) 
75% build. per. 
25% (2) 25% 2 ½ stories 
or 35 ft. 
(7) 
Rural Residence 50,000 200 35 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. lot per. (2) 
(non-residential) 
75% build. per. 
25% (2) 25% 2 ½ stories 
or 35 ft. 
(7) 
Neighborhood Business 25,000 125 50 ft. 25 ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. lot per. (2) 
75% build. per. 
25% 25% 2 ½ stories 
or 35 ft. 
(7) 
General Business 25,000 125 50 ft. 25 ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. lot per. (2) 
75% build. per. 
25% 25% 3 stories 
or 45 ft 
(7) 
Commercial 25,000 125 50 ft. 25 ft. 35 ft. 10 ft. lot per. (2) 
75% build. per. 
25% 25% 3 stories 
or 45 ft. 
Industrial 60,000 150 100 ft. (4) 35 ft. (1) 50 ft. 20 ft. lot per. (2), 
(3) 
75% build. per. 
25% (3) 50% 45 ft. above 
grade plane (5) 
 
 
a To determine compliance with the minimum lot area requirements in all zoning districts except the Multi- Family District, Townhouse Overlay District, and Elderly Housing Overlay 
District, at least 50 percent of the minimum lot area shall be contiguous uplan d, free of bordering vegetative wetlands as defined by G.L., c. 131, § 40 
Billerica Zoning Bylaw 
(1) Side yard shall be increased to 50 feet on any lot that abuts land in a residential district. 
(2) The Green Strip and Green Space requirements in the residential districts apply to nonresidential and nonagricultural uses only and not to principal 
and accessory residential uses. See Sections 7.3E-F for specific requirements. 
(3) These requirements also apply in the following special districts: Refuse Transfer Station, Private and Public Dumping Ground, Alcohol and Drug 
Rehabilitation Hospital, Composting, and Adult Entertainment Districts. 
(4) In Industrial Districts, the required front setback may be reduced to 40 feet along industrial roads. The front yard must be used for landscaping, pedestrian 
walkways, and curb cut access driveways only. 
(5) The highest roof surface shall not exceed 55 feet above the grade plane. 
(6) These yards are reduced in the Historic Overlay District 
(7) The maximum height shall be twenty-eight for lots with areas of 7,500 square feet or less. 